1 Advanced Airway Support 
   Robert J.  Vissers  
 Control of the airway is the single most important task for emergency 
resuscitation.
 ■  INITIAL APPROACH 
 The initial approach to airway management is simultaneous assessment and 
management of the adequacy of airway patency (the A of the ABCs) and oxygenation and ventilation (the B of the ABCs). 
    1.    Assess patient’s color and respiratory rate; respiratory or cardiac arrest 
may be an indication for immediate intubation.  
   2.    Open the airway with head tilt–chin lift maneuver (use jaw thrust if 
C-spine injury is suspected). If needed, bag the patient with the bag-valve-mask device that includes an O 
2  reservoir. A good seal depends on proper 
mask size. This technique may require an oral or nasal airway or two rescuers (one to seal the mask with 2 hands and the other to bag the patient). 
   3.    Provide continuous monitoring of vital signs, oxygen saturation, and 
end-tidal CO 
2  (if possible).  
   4.    Determine the need for invasive airway management techniques. Do not 
wait for arterial blood gas analyses if the initial assessment indicates the need for invasive airway management. If the patient does not require immediate airway or ventilation control, administer oxygen by facemask 
to ensure an O 
2  saturation of 95%. Do not remove oxygen to draw an 
arterial blood gas analysis unless deemed safe from the initial assessment.  
   5.    Preoxygenate all patients prior to intubation regardless of saturation. 
Assess airway difficulty before initiation of advanced airway techniques.    
 ■  OROTRACHEAL INTUBATION 
 The most common means used to ensure a patent airway, prevent aspiration, 
and provide oxygenation and ventilation is orotracheal intubation. Rapid sequence intubation (RSI) should be used unless the patient’s condition makes it unnecessary (ie, cardiac arrest) or it is contraindicated because of 
an anticipated difficult airway. Resuscitative Problems 
and Techniques
 1 CHAPTER
1SECTION
2 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques 
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.   Prepare equipment, personnel, and drugs before attempting intubation. 
Assess airway difficulty and anticipate required airway rescue. Assem-ble and place suction, bag-valve-mask and rescue devices within easy 
reach. Personnel should be present at the bedside to pass equipment or 
bag the patient, if required.  
   2.    Ensure adequate ventilation and oxygenation and monitoring while 
preparing equipment. Preoxygenate with a non–rebreather oxygen mask at maximal oxygen flow rates or with a bag-valve-mask if the patient is not ventilating adequately.  
   3.    Select blade type and size (usually a No. 3 or 4 curved blade or a No. 2 
or 3 straight blade); test the blade light. Select the tube size (usually 7.5 to 8.0 mm in women, 8.0 to 8.5 mm in men) and test the balloon cuff. The use of a flexible stylet is recommended.  
   4.    Position the patient with the head extended and neck flexed, possibly 
with a rolled towel under the occiput. If C-spine injury is suspected, maintain the head and neck in a neutral position with an assistant per-forming inline stabilization. 
   5.    With the handle in the operator’s left hand, insert the blade to push the 
tongue to the patient’s left and slowly advance to the epiglottis. Suction-ing may be required. It is not uncommon to go past the larynx into the esophagus. Gradually withdraw the blade to reveal the epiglottis. If the curved blade is used, slide the tip into the vallecula and lift (indirectly lifting the epiglottis); if a straight blade is used, lift the epiglottis 
directly. Lift along the axis of the laryngoscope handle. Avoid levering 
the blade on the teeth to prevent dental trauma.  
   6.    Once the vocal cords are visualized, gently pass the tube between the 
cords. Remove the tube, check for tube placement by ventilating and listening for bilateral breath sounds and absence of epigastric sounds. Inflate the cuff.
        7.    If the cords are not visualized, manipulate the thyroid cartilage using 
backward, upward, and rightward pressure (the “burp” maneuver) to help bring the cords into view. If unsuccessful, reoxygenation may need to be performed with bag-valve-mask device. Consider changing the blade, the tube size, or the position of the patient before further attempts. 
Consider using an intubating stylet (bougie, see Fig. 1-1). Three unsuc-
cessful attempts define a failed airway, and other rescue techniques must be considered. 
   8.    Confirm placement objectively with an end-tidal CO 
2  detector, capno-
graphy, or in cardiac arrest, an esophageal detection device. Check tube length; the usual distance (marked on the tube) from corner of the mouth to 2 cm above the carina is 23 cm in men and 21 cm in women.  
   9.   Secure the tube and verify placement with a portable radiograph.   
 Immediate complications include unrecognized esophageal intubation or 
mainstem bronchus intubation. Failure to confirm the position immediately 
can result in hypoxia and neurologic injury. Endobronchial intubation is 
usually on the right side and is corrected by withdrawing the tube 2 cm and listening for equal breath sounds.   
CHAPTER 1: Advanced Airway Support 3
 ■  RAPID SEQUENCE INTUBATION (RSI) INDUCTION 
 RSI is the simultaneous administration of an induction and a neuromuscular 
blocking agent to facilitate orotracheal intubation. This technique couples sedation with muscular paralysis. Anticipated difficulty in mask ventilation or intubation is a relative contraindication to RSI. 
 The presence of 2 of the following 5 factors predict possible difficulty 
with bagging: facial hair, obesity, no teeth, advanced age, or snoring. Mul-
tiple external features, such as facial hair, obesity, short neck, short or long 
chin, and any airway deformity, suggest possible difficulty with intubation. A small oral opening, decreased neck mobility, a poor view of the posterior pharynx also suggest possible problems. If difficulty is anticipated, con-sider other methods of airway management such as videolaryngoscopy, awake intubation, cricothyrotomy, or an alternative airway device. 
    1.    Prepare equipment, medication, and personnel before initiation of RSI. 
Check equipment function.  
   2.   Preoxygenate the patient with 100% oxygen. 
   3.    Consider pretreatment in patients with reactive airway disease or increased 
intracranial pressure. Evidence is mixed on whether pretreat ment improves 
outcomes. Fentanyl,  3 micrograms/ kilogram may be used in normoten-
sive patients with possible raised intracranial pressure, cardiac ischemia, 
or aortic dissection. Lidocaine, 1 milligram/kilogram IV , could be used in patients with possible raised ICP or asthma. 
   4.    An induction agent should be pushed intravenously.  Etomidate,
0.3 milligrams/kilogram, is an excellent choice in most circumstances. FIGURE 1-1.      Depiction of a gum elastic bougie after insertion, before placement of 
the endotracheal tube. Procedure: The tip is angled to facilitate insertion when the glot-
tis cannot be fully visualized. Insertion into the trachea can be appreciated by feeling 
the tip moving over the tracheal  rings. The ETT is threaded over the introducer into the trachea, and the introducer is then removed.  
4 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques 
Propofol,   0.5 to 1.5 milligram/kilogram or  ketamine   1 to 2 milligram/
kilogram may also be considered. Use caution in hypotensive patients; avoid propofol.  Ketamine   is a good choice for patients with active 
bronchospasm, and may be the best choice in hypotensive patients.  
   5.    Push a paralytic agent intravenously immediately after the induction 
dose. Succinylcholine,   1.0 to 1.5 milligram/ kilogram, is preferred in 
most cases because of its rapid onset and short duration of action; it should not be used in a patient with a neuromuscular disorder, a dener-vation injury older than 7 days, or severe burns older than 5 days because 
hyperkalemia may occur.  Rocuronium, 1 milligram/kilogram IV  , a non-
depolarizing agent, is a reasonable alternative.  
   6.    Cricoid pressure may be applied at the discretion of the provider, however, 
it can be associated with a worsening laryngoscopic view and ability to 
bag-ventilate. 
   7.    Once muscle relaxation occurs, usually after 35 to 60 sec, intubate the 
trachea and confirm tube placement using the techniques described above.  
   8.    Be prepared to use bag-mask ventilation if intubation fails and satura-
tions are less than 90%. Three unsuccessful attempts define a failed airway, and other rescue techniques must be considered.    
 ■  ALTERNATIVE AIRWAY DEVICES 
 A number of rescue devices are available for management of the difficult 
airway. Intubating stylets (or gum elastic bougies) are semi-rigid stylets with a coude tip, which can be placed by feel, during laryngoscopy, into the trachea. The tracheal tube is then guided over the intubating stylet into the trachea. This device is useful for anterior cords that cannot be directly visualized.
 The laryngeal mask airway (LMA) is an airway device that is placed 
blindly into the supraglottic space ( Fig. 1-2 ). A distal ringed balloon is inflated which seals the glottis above the larynx and allows for ventilation. A disadvantage is that the airway is not protected from aspiration and leaks may occur at high ventilatory pressures. The Intubating-LMA allows for the placement of a cuffed endotracheal tube through the device. 
  Videolaryngoscopy is an excellent option for airway rescue or as a 
 primary intubation technique. Most studies demonstrate improved laryngo-scopic views compared to traditional laryngoscopy. These devices can be 
advantageous in patients with restricted oral opening or cervical spine 
mobility. 
Cricothyrotomy
 Cricothyrotomy is performed when intubation, ventilation, and airway 
rescue has failed. Cricothyrotomy is contraindicated in children younger than 10 to 12 years in whom trans tracheal jet ventilation is the preferred subglottic technique. 
    1.    Use sterile technique. Palpate the cricothyroid membrane and stabilize 
the larynx ( Fig. 1-3 ). With a No. 11 scalpel, make a vertical, 3 to 4 cm incision starting at the superior border of the thyroid cartilage. Incise caudally toward the suprasternal notch.  
CHAPTER 1: Advanced Airway Support 5
A
B
FIGURE 1-2. A. Laryngeal mask airway (LMA).  B.  LMA diagram showing placement 
at the larynx. 
6 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques 
   2.    Repalpate the membrane and make a 1 to 2 cm horizontal incision 
through the cricothyroid membrane. Keep the blade in place 
 temporarily.  
   3.    Stabilize the trachea by inserting the tracheal hook into the cricothyroid 
space and retracting the inferior edge of the thyroid cartilage (an assistant should hold the hook after it is placed).  
   4.    Remove the scalpel and insert a dilator to enlarge the opening (LaBorde 
or Trousseau).
        5.    Introduce a No. 4 cuffed tracheostomy tube (or the largest tube that will 
fit). Alternatively, use a small cuffed endotracheal tube (No. 6 or the largest tube that will fit). Inflate the cuff.  
   6.    Check for bilateral breath sounds. After confirmation of tube placement, 
remove the hook. Secure the tube. The presence of subcutaneous air 
suggests placement outside the trachea. Placement should be confirmed with an end-tidal CO 
2  detector and radiograph.   
 Manufactured cricothyrotomy kits using a Seldinger technique are 
also available. Formal tracheostomy is not recommended as an emergency  surgical airway technique due to increased technical difficulty and increased time required. 
 ■  NONINVASIVE POSITIVE PRESSURE VENTILATION 
 Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) provides positive pressure 
airway support using preset volume/pressure of inspiratory air through a face or nasal mask. NPPV has been used as an alternative to endotracheal intubation in patients with ventilatory failure due to COPD, and cardiogenic FIGURE 1-3.      Anatomy of the neck.  Thyroid
cartilage
Cricothyroid
membrane
Cricoid
cartilage
ManubriumHyoid bone
Thyroid
gland
Clavicle
Trachea
CHAPTER 1: Advanced Airway Support 7
pulmonary edema. Patients need to be cooperative and without  cardiac ischemia, 
hypotension or dysrhythmia. 
 Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) provides constant positive 
pressure throughout the respiratory cycle. CPAP pressures are usually between 5 and 15 cm H 
2 O and are adjusted to the patients’ response to 
therapy. 
 Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) uses different levels of pressure 
during inspiration and expiration. Initial settings of 8 to 10 cm H 2 O during 
inspiration and 3 to 4 cm H 2 O during expiration are reasonable and can be 
titrated up based on clinical response. 
 Alternative drugs for rapid sequence induction are listed in  Chapter 30  
ofEmergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th ed. Airway 
management alternatives to the methods described earlier include blind nasotracheal intubation, digital intubation, transillumination, extraglottic 
devices, flexible and rigid fiberoptics, retrograde tracheal intubation, and 
translaryngeal ventilation. These techniques are described in  Chapters 28 ,  30 , and  31  of  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th ed.  
     For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th ed., 
see Chapter 28, “Noninvasive Airway Management,” by A. Michael Roman; Chapter 30, “Tracheal Intubation and Mechanical Ventilation,” by Robert J. Vissers and Daniel F. Danzl; and Chapter 31, “Surgical Airway Management,” by  Michael D. Smith.   
8
 CHAPTER
2  Arrhythmia Management 
   James K.  Takayesu  
 ■SINUS ARRHYTHMIA
 Some variation in the sinoatrial (SA) node discharge rate is common;  however, 
if the variation exceeds 0.12 second between the longest and shortest intervals, sinus arrhythmia is present. The electrocardiogram (ECG) characteristics of sinus arrhythmia are ( a ) normal sinus P waves and PR intervals, ( b ) 1:1 atrio-
ventricular (A V) conduction, and ( c ) variation of at least 0.12 second between 
the shortest and longest P–P interval ( Fig. 2-1 ). Sinus arrhythmias are affected 
primarily by respiration and are most commonly found in children and young 
adults, disappearing with advancing age. Occasional junctional escape beats may be present during very long P–P intervals. No treatment is required. 
 ■   PREMATURE ATRIAL CONTRACTIONS 
 Premature atrial contractions (PACs) have the following ECG characteristics: ( a ) 
the ectopic P wave appears sooner (premature) than the next expected sinus beat; (b ) the ectopic P wave has a different shape and direction; and ( c ) the ectopic P 
wave may or may not be conducted through the A V node ( Fig. 2-2 ). Most PACs 
are conducted with typical QRS complexes, but some may be conducted aber-rantly through the infranodal system, typically with a right bundle branch block 
pattern. When the PAC occurs during the absolute refractory period, it is not 
conducted. Since the sinus node is often depolarized and reset, the pause is less than fully compensatory. PACs are associated with stress, fatigue, alcohol use, tobacco, coffee, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), digoxin toxic-ity, coronary artery disease, and may occur after adenosine-converted paroxys-mal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT). PACs are common in all ages, often in the absence of significant heart disease. Patients may complain of palpitations or an intermittent “sinking” or “fluttering” feeling in the chest. 
   Emergency Department Care and Disposition   
   1.   Discontinue precipitating drugs (alcohol, tobacco, or coffee) or toxins.  
   2.   Treat underlying disorders (stress or fatigue).     3.    PACs that produce significant symptoms or initiate sustained tachycardias 
can be suppressed with agents such as β-adrenergic antagonists (eg, 
metoprolol 25 to 50 milligrams PO 3 times daily), usually in consulta-
tion with a follow-up physician.   
 ■     SUPRAVENTRICULAR BRADYARRYTHMIAS 
  Sinus Bradycardia 
  Clinical Features 
 Sinus bradycardia occurs when the SA node rate becomes slower than 
60 beats/min. The ECG characteristics of sinus bradycardia are ( a ) normal 
sinus P waves and PR intervals, ( b ) 1:1 A V conduction, and ( c ) atrial rate 
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 9
slower than 60 beats/min. Sinus bradycardia represents a suppression of the 
sinus node discharge rate, usually in response to 3 categories of stimuli: (a ) physiologic (vagal tone), ( b ) pharmacologic (calcium channel blockers, 
β-blockers, or digoxin), and ( c ) pathologic (acute inferior myocardial 
infarction [MI], increased intracranial pressure, carotid sinus hypersensitivity, hypothyroidism, or sick sinus syndrome).  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
 Sinus bradycardia usually does not require specific treatment unless the heart 
rate is slower than 50 beats/min and there is evidence of hypoperfusion.     1 .      Transcutaneous cardiac pacing   is the only Class I treatment for unstable 
patients.
 a.      Attach the patient to the monitor leads of the external pacing  device.   b.    When placing transcutaneous pacing pads, place the anterior pad 
over the left lateral precordium and the posterior pad at the level of 
the heart in the right infrascapular area. Do not use multifunction pacing defibrillation pads unless the patient is unconscious as they cause a lot of discomfort.  
 c.    Slowly increase the pacing output from 0 mA to the lowest point where 
capture is observed, usually at 50 to 100 mA, but may be up to 200 mA. A widened QRS after each pacing spike denotes electrical capture. 
FIGURE 2-1.      Sinus arrhythmia.  
FIGURE 2-2.      Premature atrial contractions (PACs).  A.  Ectopic P ′ waves (arrows). 
B.  Atrial bigeminy.  
10 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
 d.    If needed, administer a sedative, such as lorazepam, 1 to 2 milligrams 
IV , or an opiate, such as morphine, 2 to 4 milligrams IV , for pain control.
   2 .      Atropine   is a Class IIa treatment for symptomatic bradycardia. The dose is 
0.5 milligram IV push, repeated every 3 to 5 min as needed up to a total of 
3 milligrams IV . If given via endotracheal tube, increase the dose by 2 to 2.5 times over the IV dose. Slow administration or lower doses may cause paradoxical bradycardia. Atropine may not be effective in cardiac transplant patients since the heart is denervated and has no vagal stimu-lation
   3 .     Epinephrine,   2 to 10 micrograms/min IV , or  dopamine,   3 to 10 micro-
grams/kilogram/min IV , may be used if external pacing is not available.  
   4.    Internal pacing will be required in the patient with symptomatic recur-
rent or persistent sinus bradycardia due to sick sinus syndrome.  
   5.    Isoproterenol, 2 to 10 micrograms/min IV infusion may be effective but 
carries a risk of increased myocardial oxygen demand and hypotension.      
 ■  SUPRVENTRICULAR TACHYARRYTHMIAS 
  Sinus Tachycardia 
  Clinical Features 
 The ECG characteristics of sinus tachycardia are ( a ) normal sinus P waves 
and PR intervals and ( b ) an atrial rate usually between 100 and 160 beats/
min. Sinus tachycardia is in response to three categories of stimuli: (a ) physiologic (pain or exertion), ( b ) pharmacologic (sympathomimetics, 
caffeine, or bronchodilators), or ( c ) pathologic (fever, hypoxia, anemia, 
hypovolemia, pulmonary embolism, or hyperthyroidism). In many of these 
conditions, the increased heart rate is an effort to increase cardiac output to 
match increased circulatory needs. 
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
 Diagnose and treat the underlying condition.   
  Supraventricular Tachycardia 
  Clinical Features 
 Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a regular, rapid rhythm that arises 
from impulse reentry or an ectopic pacemaker above the bifurcation of the His bundle. The reentrant variety is the most common ( Fig. 2-3 ). Patients often present with acute, symptomatic episodes termed paroxysmal supra-ventricular tachycardia (PSVT) .  Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia 
(A VnRT) can occur in a normal heart or in association with rheumatic heart 
disease, acute pericarditis, MI, mitral valve prolapse, or preexcitation  syndromes. In patients with atrioventricular bypass tracts (A VRT), reentry can occur in either direction, usually (80 to 90% of patients) in a direction that goes down the A V node and up the bypass tract producing a narrow QRS complex (orthodromic conduction). In the remaining 10% to 20% of patients, reentry occurs in the reverse direction (antidromic conduction). Ectopic SVT usu ally
originates in the atria, with an atrial rate of 100 to 250 beats/min and may 
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 11 
be seen in patients with acute MI, chronic lung disease, pneumonia, alcohol 
intoxication, or digoxin toxicity. 
  There is a high incidence of tachyarrhythmias in patients with preexci-
tation syndromes including PSVT (40–80%), atrial fibrillation (10–20%), and atrial flutter (about 5%). All forms of preexcitation are caused by 
accessory tracts that bypass part or all of the normal conducting system, 
the most common form being Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome ( Fig. 2-4 ). The ventricles are activated by an impulse from the atria sooner 
FIGURE 2-3.      Reentrant supraventricular tachycardia (SVT).  A.  2nd ( ∗) initiates run of 
PAT.B.  SVT, rate 286.  
FIGURE 2-4.      Type A Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  
12 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
than would be expected if the impulse were transmitted down the normal 
conducting pathway. This premature activation causes initial fusion beat morphology with slurring of initial QRS complex, causing the pathogno-monic delta wave. Among patients with WPW-PSVT, 80% to 90% will 
conduct in the orthodromic direction and the remaining 10% to 20% will 
conduct in the antidromic direction. ECG findings of atrial fibrillation or flutter with antidromic conduction down the bypass tract show a wide QRS complex that is irregular with a rate faster than 180 to 200 beats/min (see Atrial fibrillation).  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Perform synchronized cardioversion in any unstable patient (eg, hypo-
tension, pulmonary edema, or severe chest pain).  
   2.    In stable patients, the first intervention should be vagal maneuvers, 
including:
 a.      Valsalva maneuver: While in the supine position, ask the patient to 
strain for at least 10 seconds. The legs may be lifted to increase 
venous return and augment the reflex.  
 b.    Diving reflex: Have the patient immerse the face in cold water or 
apply a bag of ice water to the face for 6 to 7 seconds. This maneuver is particularly effective in infants.  
 c.    Carotid sinus massage: Auscultate to ensure that there is no carotid 
bruit and massage the carotid sinus against the transverse process of C6 for 10 seconds at a time, first on the side of the nondominant cerebral hemisphere. This should never be done simultaneously on both sides. 
   3.    Administer  adenosine,   6 milligrams rapid IV bolus, into a large vein 
followed by a 20 mL normal saline rapid flush. If there is no effect within 2 min, give a second dose of 12 milligrams IV . Most patients 
experience distressing chest pain, flushing, or anxiety lasting less than 
1 min. Ten percent of patients may experience transient atrial fibrilla-tion or flutter after conversion. This is first-line treatment for WPW-associated SVT with a narrow QRS complex (orthodromic conduction) but is ineffective in cases of anterograde conduction over an accessory pathway. Adenosine may induce bronchospasm in asthmatics requiring treatment with  bronchodilators.
        4.    In patients with narrow-complex SVT (orthodromic conduction) and 
normal cardiac function, cardioversion may also be achieved with the following second-line agents:
 a.      Calcium-channel blockers.  Diltiazem  , 20 milligrams (0.25 milligram/
kilogram) IV over 2 min, or  verapamil  , 0.075 to 0.15 milligram/
kilogram (3 to 10 milligrams) IV over 15 to 60 seconds with a repeat 
dose in 30 min, if necessary. Verapamil may cause hypotension that can be prevented by pretreatment with calcium chloride or gluconate (500 to 1000 milligrams).  
 b.    Beta-blockers.  Esmolol,   500 micrograms/kilogram IV bolus, 
metoprolol,   5 milligrams IV , or  propranolol,   0.1 milligram/
kilogram divided in three doses given 2 min apart.  
 c.     Digoxin,   0.4 to 0.6 milligrams IV .      
   5.    Patients with wide-complex SVT (antidromic conduction across accessory 
pathway) should be approached as presumed ventricular tachycar dia (VT; 
see Ventricular Tachycardia) unless there is a known history of WPW 
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 13 
syndrome. Patients with this type of tachycardia are at risk for rapid 
ventricular rates and degeneration into VF; therefore, agents that prefer-entially block the A V node such as β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, 
and digoxin should not be used. Treat stable patients with  procainamide  , 
17 milligrams/kilogram IV over 30 min up to 50 milligrams/kilogram, or until 50% QRS widening is noted (contraindicated in patients with myas-thenia gravis since it may increase weakness). 
  Atrial Flutter 
  Clinical Features 
 Atrial flutter is a rhythm that originates from a small area within the atria. 
ECG characteristics of atrial flutter are ( a ) a regular atrial rate between 250 
and 350 beats/min; ( b ) “saw tooth” flutter waves directed superiorly and 
most visible in leads II, III, and aV 
F ; and ( c ) A V block, usually 2:1, but 
occasionally greater or irregular ( Fig. 2-5 ). One-to-one conduction may occur if a bypass tract is present. Carotid sinus massage or Valsalva maneu-vers are useful techniques to slow the ventricular response by increasing the degree of A V block, which can unmask flutter waves in uncertain cases. Atrial flutter is seen most commonly in patients with ischemic heart disease 
as well as CHF, acute MI, pulmonary embolus, myocarditis, blunt chest 
trauma, and digoxin toxicity. Atrial flutter may be a transitional arrhythmia between sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation. Consider anticoagulation in patients with an unclear time of onset or duration longer than 48 hours before conversion to sinus rhythm due to increased risk of atrial thrombus and embolization. 
    Emergency Department Care 
 The treatment is the same as atrial fibrillation and is discussed below.   
  Atrial Fibrillation 
  Clinical Features 
 Atrial fibrillation (Afib) occurs when there are multiple, small areas of 
atrial myocardium continuously discharging in a disorganized fashion. This results in loss of effective atrial contraction and decreases left ventricular end-diastolic volume, which may precipitate CHF in patients with impaired cardiac function. The ECG characteristics of Afib are ( a ) fibrillatory waves 
of atrial activity, best seen in leads V 
1 , V 2 , V 3 , and aV F ; and ( b ) an irregular 
FIGURE 2-5.      Atrial flutter.  
14 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
ventricular response, usually between 170 to 180 beats/min in patients with 
a healthy A V node ( Fig. 2-6 ). 
  Afib may be paroxysmal (lasting for less than 7 days), persistent (lasting 
for more than 7 days), or chronic (continuous). Afib can be idiopathic (lone Afib) or may be found in association with longstanding hypertension,  ischemic heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, alcohol use (“holiday heart”), COPD, and thyrotoxicosis. Patients with LV dysfunction who depend on atrial
contraction may suffer acute CHF with Afib onset. Rates of greater than 300 beats/min with a wide QRS complex are concerning for a preexcitation syndrome such as WPW ( Fig 2-7 ). 
 Patients with Afib who are not anticoagulated have a yearly embolic 
event rate as high as 5% and a lifetime risk greater than 25%. Conversion 
from chronic Afib to sinus rhythm carries a 1% to 5% risk of arterial embo-
lism; therefore, anticoagulation for 3 weeks is required before cardiover-sion in patients with Afib for longer than 48 hours duration and in those patients with an uncertain time of onset who are not on anticoagulation therapy.  
FIGURE 2-6.      Atrial fibrillation.  
FIGURE 2-7.      Atrial fibrillation in Wolfe-Parkinson-White syndrome.  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 15 
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Treat unstable patients with synchronized cardioversion (50-100 J).  
   2.    Stable patients with Afib for longer than 48 hours should be anticoagu-
lated with heparin   (80 units/kilogram IV followed by an infusion of 18 
units/kilogram/h IV) before cardioversion. Consider a transesophageal echocardiogram to rule out atrial thrombus before cardioversion.  
   3.    Control rate with diltiazem. Administer 20 milligrams (0.25 milligram/
kilogram) IV over 2 min followed by a continuous IV infusion, 5 to 15 milligrams/h, to maintain rate control. Give a second dose of 25 milli-grams (0.35 milligram/kilogram) in 15 min if the first dose fails to con-trol rate. Alternative rate control agents for patients with normal cardiac 
function include verapamil  , 5 to 10 milligrams IV ,  metoprolol  , 5 to 10 mil-
ligrams IV , and  digoxin  , 0.4 to 0.6 milligram IV . Treat patients with 
preexcitation syndromes (eg, WPW) with  procainamide,   17 milligrams/
kilogram IV , over 30 min up to 50 milligrams/kilogram or until 50% QRS widening is noted. Avoid β-adrenergic or calcium channel blockers 
(ie, verapamil) due to the risk of causing degeneration to VF.  
   4.    In patients with impaired cardiac function (EF < 40%), use  amiodarone,
5 milligrams/kilogram IV over 30 min, followed by 1200 milligrams over 24 hours (contra indicated in patients with iodine or shellfish allergy; increased risk of rhabdomyolysis if co-administered with simv-astatin) or digoxin   0.4 to 0.6 milligram IV .  
   5.    Patients with Afib for shorter than 48 hours may be chemically or electri-
cally cardioverted in the emergency department. Use amiodarone, ibuti-lide (see comments for atrial flutter), procainamide, flecainide, or propafenone in patients with normal cardiac function. Ibutilide   is dosed 
at 0.01 milligram/kilogram IV up to 1 milligram, infused over 10 min. A 
second ibutilide dose may be given if there is no response in 20 min. 
Ibutilide should not be administered to patients with known structural 
heart disease, hypokalemia, prolonged QTc intervals, hypomagnesemia, or CHF because of the possibility of provoking torsades de pointes. Monitor for 4 to 6 hours after giving ibutilide. Patients with impaired cardiac function may be cardioverted with amiodarone or electrically. 
     Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia 
  Clinical Features 
 Multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT) is defined as at least 3 different sites of 
atrial ectopy. The ECG characteristics of MAT are ( a ) 3 or more differently 
shaped P waves; ( b ) changing PP, PR, and RR intervals; and ( c ) atrial 
rhythm usually between 100 and 180 beats/min ( Fig. 2-8 ). Because the 
FIGURE 2-8.      Multifocal atrial tachycardia (MFAT).  
16 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
rhythm is irregularly irregular, MAT can be confused with atrial flutter or 
atrial fibrillation (AFib). MAT is found most often in elderly patients with decompensated COPD, but it also may be found in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF), sepsis, methylxanthine toxicity, or digoxin toxicity.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.   Treat the underlying disorder.  
   2.    Specific antiarrhythmic treatment is rarely indicated. Rate control may 
be achieved with  verapamil   5 to 10 milligrams IV , or  diltiazem   10 to 20 
milligrams IV in patients with acute COPD or CHF exacerbations.  
   3 .      Magnesium sulfate   2 grams IV over 60 seconds followed by a constant 
infusion of 1 to 2 grams/h may decrease ectopy and convert MAT to 
sinus rhythm in some patients.  
   4.    Replete potassium levels to greater than 4 mEq/L to increase myocardial 
membrane stability.   
     Junctional Rhythms 
  Clinical Features 
 In patients with sinus bradycardia, SA node exit block or A V block, junc-
tional escape beats may occur, usually at a rate between 40 and 60 beats/min, depending on the level of the rescue pacemaker within the conduction system. Junctional escape beats may conduct retrogradely into the atria, but the QRS complex usually will mask any retrograde P wave ( Fig. 2-9 ). When alternating rhythmically with the SA node, junctional escape beats 
may cause bigeminal or trigeminal rhythms. Sustained junctional escape 
rhythms may be seen with CHF, myocarditis, acute MI (especially inferior MI), hyperkalemia, or digoxin toxicity (“regularized Afib”). If the ventricu-lar rate is too slow, myocardial or cerebral ischemia may develop. In cases of enhanced junctional automaticity, junctional rhythms may be accelerated (60 to 100 beats/min) or tachycardic (≥ 100 beats/min), thus overriding the 
SA node rate. 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Isolated, infrequent junctional escape beats usually do not require spe-
cific treatment. 
   2.    If sustained junctional escape rhythms are producing symptoms, treat 
the underlying cause. 
   3.    In unstable patients, give  atropine   0.5 milligram IV every 5 min to a 
total of 2 milligrams. This will accelerate the SA node discharge rate 
and enhance A V nodal conduction.  
FIGURE 2-9.      Junctional escape rhythm, rate 42.  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 17 
   4.    Use transcutaneous or transvenous pacing in unstable patients not 
responsive to atropine.  
   5.   Manage patients with digoxin toxicity as discussed for SVT.      
 ■  VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS 
  Premature Ventricular Contractions 
  Clinical Features 
 Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) are due to impulses originating 
from single or multiple areas in the ventricles. The ECG characteristics of PVCs are: ( a ) a premature and wide QRS complex; ( b ) no preceding 
P wave; ( c ) the ST segment and T wave of the PVC are directed opposite 
the preceding major QRS deflection; ( d ) most PVCs do not affect the sinus 
node, so there is usually a fully compensatory post-ectopic pause, or the 
PVC may be interpolated between 2 sinus beats; ( e ) many PVCs have a 
fixed coupling interval (within 0.04 second) from the preceding sinus beat; and (  f  ) many PVCs are conducted into the atria, thus producing a retro-
grade P wave ( Fig. 2-10 ). If 3 or more PVCs occur in a row, patients are considered to have nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. 
 PVCs are very common, occurring in most patients with ischemic heart 
disease and acute MI. Other common causes of PVCs include digoxin tox icity, 
FIGURE 2-10.      Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs).  A.  Unifocal PVC. 
B.  Interpolated PVC.  C.  Multifocal PVCs.  
18 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
CHF, hypokalemia, alkalosis, hypoxia, and sympathomimetic drugs. 
Pooled data and meta-analyses have found no reduction in mortality from suppressive or prophylactic treatment of PVCs. Ventricular parasystole occurs when the ectopic ventricular focus fires frequently enough to com-
pete with the SA node and is associated with cardiac ischemia, electrolyte 
imbalance, and hypertensive or ischemic heart disease.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.   Stable patients require no treatment.  
   2.   Patients with 3 or more PVCs occur in a row should be managed as VT.     3.    For hemodynamically unstable patients with PVCs, consider  lidocaine
1 to 1.5 milligrams/kilogram IV (up to 3 milligrams/kilogram) unless the patient is allergic to amide anesthestics.   
     Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm 
  Clinical Features 
 The ECG characteristics of accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR) are 
(a ) wide and regular QRS complexes; ( b ) a rate between 40 and 100 beats/
min, often close to the preceding sinus rate; ( c ) mostly runs of short dura-
tion (3 to 30 beats/min); and ( d ) an AIVR often beginning with a fusion 
beat ( Fig. 2-11 ). This condition is found most commonly with an acute MI or in the setting of reperfusion after successful thrombolysis. 
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
 Treatment is not necessary. On occasion, AIVR may be the only function-
ing pacemaker, and suppression with lidocaine can lead to cardiac asystole. 
     Ventricular Tachycardia 
  Clinical Features 
 VT is the occurrence of 3 or more successive beats from a ventricular ectopic 
pacemaker at a rate faster than 100 beats/min. The ECG characteristics of VT are ( a ) a wide QRS complex, ( b ) a rate faster than 100 beats/min (most 
commonly 150 to 200 beats/min), ( c ) a regular rhythm, although there may 
be some initial beat-to-beat variation, and ( d ) a constant QRS axis ( Fig. 2-12 ). 
The most common causes of VT are ischemic heart disease and acute MI. 
Because of this fact, patients presenting with VT should be considered candidates for urgent revascularization. 
FIGURE 2-11.      Accelerated idioventricular rhythms (AIVRs).  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 19 
  Other etiologies include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mitral valve 
prolapse, drug toxicity (digoxin, antiarrhythmics, or sympathomimetics), hypoxia, hypokalemia, and hyperkalemia. In general, all wide complex tachycardia should be treated as VT regardless of clinical symptoms or initial vital signs. Adenosine appears to cause little harm in patients with VT; therefore, stable patients with wide complex tachycardia due to sus-pected SVT with aberrancy (see previous section) may be treated safely 
with adenosine when the diagnosis is in doubt. Atypical VT (torsade de 
pointes, or twisting of the points) occurs when the QRS axis swings from a positive to a negative direction in a single lead at a rate of 200 to 240 beats/min ( Fig. 2-13 ). Drugs that further prolong repolarization—quinidine, diso-pyramide, procainamide, phenothiazines, and tricyclic antidepressants—exacerbate this arrhythmia. 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Defibrillate pulseless VT with unsynchronized cardioversion starting at 
100J. Treat unstable patients who are not pulseless with synchronized cardioversion.  
   2.    Treat hemodynamically stable patients with  amiodarone,   150 milligrams 
IV over 10 min with repeated boluses every 10 min up to a total of 2 grams. Alternatively, an infusion of 0.5 milligram/min over 18 hours 
FIGURE 2-12.      Ventricular tachycardia.  
FIGURE 2-13.      Two examples of short runs of atypical ventricular tachycardia show-
ing sinusoidal variation in amplitude and direction of the QRS complexes: “Le torsade 
de pointes” (twisting of the points). Note that the top example is initiated by a late-
occurring PVC (lead II).  
20 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
may be given after the initial bolus. Second-line agents include procain-
amide (in patients without suspected MI or LV dysfunction) and lidocaine. 
   3.    For patients with torsades de pointes: Try overdrive pacing set at 90 to 
120 beats/min to terminate torsades de pointes. 
4.   Magnesium sulfate   1 to 2 grams IV over 60 to 90 seconds followed by 
an infusion of 1 to 2 grams/h can be effective. 
5.   Isoproterenol,  2 to 10 micrograms/min IV infusion, is also used in refrac-
tory torsades but carries a risk of increased myocardial oxygen demand. 
  SVT with Aberrancy Versus Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias 
 Patients with wide-complex tachycardia should be approached as having 
VT until proven otherwise. Age over 35 years, a history of MI, CHF, or coronary artery bypass grafting strongly favor VT. ECG signs favoring VT include A V dissociation, fusion beats, precordial lead QRS concordance, and a QRS duration longer than 0.14 second.  
  Ventricular Fibrillation 
  Clinical Features 
 VF is the totally disorganized depolarization and contraction of small areas 
of ventricular myocardium during which there is no effective ventricular pumping activity. The ECG shows a fine-to-coarse zigzag pattern without discernible P waves or QRS complexes ( Fig. 2-14 ). VF is seen most com-monly in patients with severe ischemic heart disease, with or without an 
acute MI. It also can be caused by digoxin or quinidine toxicity , hypother-
mia, chest trauma, hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, or mechanical stimulation 
(eg, catheter wire). Primary VF occurs suddenly, without preceding hemo-
dynamic deterioration, and usually is due to acute ischemia or peri-infarct 
scar reentry. Secondary VF occurs after a prolonged period of hemody-namic deterioration due to left ventricular failure or circulatory shock. 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Perform immediate electrical defibrillation (unsynchronized) at 200 J 
(biphasic) and 360 J (monophasic). If VF persists, do 5 cycles of CPR, check pulse, and defibrillate again if no pulse is present. Keep defibril-lation pads on the patient and in the same location because, with succes-sive countershocks, transthoracic impedance decreases.  
   2.    If the initial 2 cycles of CPR and defibrillation are unsuccessful, administer 
antiarrhythmic treatment using amiodarone   300 milligrams IV push. 
FIGURE 2-14.      Ventricular fibrillation.  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 21 
Lido caine   is second-line and is dosed at 1.5 milligrams/kilogram IV 
followed by 0.75 milligram/kilogram IV for two more doses. Repeat the 
CPR-defibrillation cycle.  
   3.    If no pulse is present after the third CPR-defibrillation cycle, give 
 epinephrine   1 milligram IV push, or  vasopressin   40 units IV push 
(1 time only), followed by a 20-mL normal saline flush and immediate resumption of the CPR-defibrillation cycle.  
   4.    In refractory VF, administer  magnesium sulfate   1 to 2 grams IV over 
60 to 90 seconds followed by an infusion of 1 to 2 grams/h.      
 ■  CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES 
  Atrioventricular (AV) Block 
 First-degree A V block is characterized by a delay in A V conduction, manifested 
by a prolonged PR interval (> 0.2 second). It can be found in normal hearts and in association with increased vagal tone, digoxin toxicity,  inferior MI, amyloid, and myocarditis. First-degree A V block needs no treatment. Second-degree A V block is characterized by intermittent A V nodal conduction: some atrial impulses reach the ventricles, whereas others are blocked, thereby causing 
“grouped beating.” These blocks can subdivided into nodal blocks which are 
typically reversible and infranodal blocks which are due to irreversible conduc-tion system disease. Third-degree A V block is characterized by complete inter-ruption in A V conduction with resulting A V dissociation. 
  Second-Degree Mobitz I (Wenckebach) AV Block 
  Clinical Features 
 Mobitz I A V block is a nodal block causing a progressive prolongation 
of conduction through the A V node until the atrial impulse is com-pletely blocked. Usually, only one atrial impulse is blocked at a time. After the dropped beat, the A V conduction returns to normal and the cycle usually repeats itself with the same conduction ratio (fixed ratio) or a different conduction ratio (variable ratio). Although the PR inter-
vals progressively lengthen before the dropped beat, the increments by 
which they lengthen  decrease   with successive beats causing a progres-
sive  shortening   of each successive R–R interval before the dropped 
beat ( Fig. 2-15 ). This block is often transient and usually associated 
with an acute inferior MI, digoxin toxicity, or myocarditis or can be seen after cardiac surgery. Because the blockade occurs at the level of the A V node itself rather than at the infranodal conducting system, this is usually a stable rhythm. 
FIGURE 2-15.      Second-degree Mobitz I (Wenckebach) AV block 4:3 AV conduction.  
22 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Specific treatment is not necessary unless slow ventricular rates produce 
signs of hypoperfusion.  
   2.    In cases associated with acute inferior MI, provide adequate volume 
resuscitation before initiating further interventions.  
   3.    Administer  atropine   0.5 milligram IV repeated every 5 min. Titrate to 
the desired heart rate or until the total dose reaches 2 milligrams.  
   4.    Although rarely needed, transcutaneous pacing may be used.     
  Second-Degree Mobitz II AV Block 
  Clinical Features 
 Mobitz II A V block is typically due to infranodal disease, causing a con-
stant PR interval with intermittent non-conducted atrial beats ( Fig. 2-16 ). One or more beats may be non-conducted at a single time. This block indi-cates significant damage or dysfunction of the infranodal conduction sys-tem; therefore, the QRS complexes are usually wide coming from the low His-Purkinje bundle or the ventricles. Type II blocks are more dangerous 
than type I blocks because they are usually permanent and may progress 
suddenly to complete heart block, especially in the setting of an acute ante-rior MI, and almost always require permanent cardiac pacemaker placement. When second-degree A V block occurs with a fixed conduction ratio of 2:1, it is not possible to differentiate between a Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) and Mobitz type II block. 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1 .      Atropine   0.5 to 1 milligram IV bolus repeated every 5 min as needed up to 
2 milligrams total dose is first-line treatment for symptomatic patients. All patients should have transcutaneous pacing pads positioned and ready for use in the case of further deterioration into complete heart block. 
   2.    Initiate transcutaneous cardiac pacing (see section on sinus bradycardia) 
in patients unresponsive to atropine.  
FIGURE 2-16. A.  Second-degree Mobitz II AV block.  B.  Second-degree AV block with 
2:1 AV conduction.  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 23 
   3.    If transcutaneous pacing is unsuccessful, initiate transvenous pacing 
(0.2 to 20 mA at 40 to 140 beats/min via a semi-floating or balloon-tipped pacing catheter). 
  Third-Degree (Complete) AV Block 
  Clinical Features 
 In third-degree A V block, there is no A V conduction. The ventricles are 
paced by an escape pacemaker from the A V node or infranodal conduction system at a rate slower than the atrial rate ( Fig. 2-17 ). When third-degree A V block occurs at the A V node, a junctional escape pacemaker takes over with a ventricular rate of 40 to 60 beats/min; and, because the rhythm originates from above the bifurcation of the His bundle, the QRS com-
plexes are narrow. Nodal third-degree A V block may develop in up to 8% 
of acute inferior MIs and it is usually transient, although it may last for several days. 
  When third-degree A V block occurs at the infranodal level, the ventri-
cles are driven by a ventricular escape rhythm at a rate slower than 40 beats/min. Third-degree A V block located in the bundle branch or the Purkinje system invariably has an escape rhythm with a wide QRS complex. Like Mobitz type II block, this indicates structural damage to the infranodal conduction system and can be seen in acute anterior MIs. The ventricular escape pacemaker is usually inadequate to maintain cardiac output and is unstable with periods of ventricular asystole.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Perform transcutaneous cardiac pacing in unstable patients until a trans-
venous pacemaker can be placed.  
   2.    In stable patients, apply transcutaneous pacing pads. Treat the same as 
second-degree Mobitz II A V block.      
 ■  FASCICULAR BLOCKS 
 Conduction blocks may arise in one or more of the three infranodal conduc-
tion pathways. Blockage of either of the left fascicles does not prolong the QRS duration, but will change the QRS axis. Left anterior fascicular block (LAFB) causes left axis deviation while left posterior fascicular block 
(LPFB) causes right axis deviation. Right bundle branch block (RBBB) will 
prolong the QRS duration (> 0.12 sec) and cause a RSR in the early precor-dial leads (V1-2). Bifascicular block denotes a combination of any two of these fascicles, the most notable of which is left bundle branch block (LAFB + LPFB). Trifascicular block denotes the presence of first degree 
FIGURE 2-17.      Third-degree AV block.  
24 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
A V block in the presence of a bifascicular block and is indicative of sig-
nificant conduction system disease that includes the A V node, thus increas-ing the risk of Mobitz II or third-degree A V block and the potential need for permanent pacemaker placement. 
 ■  CONDUCTION ABNORMALITIES THAT CAN CAUSE 
RHYTHM DISTURBANCES 
 Brugada syndrome and long-QT syndrome increase the risk of spontaneous 
VT/VF and require evaluation for implantable cardiac defibrillator place-ment when diagnosed. Brugada syndrome is a genetic disorder of fast sodium channels causing a RBBB-pattern in the early precordial leads (V1-2) with a pathognomonic J-point elevation and saddle-shaped or sloped ST segment ( Fig. 2-18 ). Long QT syndrome is characterized by a 
QT interval > 470 msec in men and > 480 msec in women and may be con-
genital or acquired, leading to an increased risk of torsades be pointes. 
 ■    PRETERMINAL RHYTHMS 
  Pulseless Electrical Activity 
 Pulseless electrical activity is the presence of electrical complexes without 
accompanying mechanical contraction of the heart. Potential mechanical causes should be diagnosed and treated, including severe hypovolemia, cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax, massive pulmonary embolus, MI, and toxic ingestions (eg, tricyclic antidepressants, calcium channel 
blockers, β-blockers). In addition, profound metabolic abnormalities such 
as acidosis, hypoxia, hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, and hypothermia also should be considered and treated. 
 After intubation and initiating CPR, administer  epinephrine,  1 milligram 
IV/IO (1:10 000 solution) every 3 to 5 min. If giving via endotracheal tube, increase the dose 2 to 2.5 times and follow with several rapid ventilations to disperse the drug. Treatment is guided by rapid identification and treatment 
FIGURE 2-18.      Brugada syndrome.  
CHAPTER 2: Arrhythmia Management 25 
of the underlying cause. Use agents with α-adrenergic activity, such as nor-
epinephrine and phenylephrine, to improve vascular tone when indicated. 
Electrical pacing is not effective.  
  Idioventricular Rhythm 
 Idioventricular rhythm is a ventricular escape rhythm at slower than 
40 beats/min with a QRS wider than 0.16 second. It is associated with infranodal A V block, massive MI, cardiac tamponade, and exsanguinating hemorrhage.
 After intubation and initiating CPR, treatment includes identifying con-
tributing mechanical factors (eg, aggressive volume resuscitation) and 
α-adrenergic agents.  
  Asystole (Cardiac Standstill) 
 Asystole is the complete absence of cardiac electrical activity and carries a 
grim prognosis. Treatment is the same as that for pulseless electrical activity.   
 ■  CARDIAC PACEMAKERS AND AUTOMATED INTERNAL 
CARDIAC DEFIBRILLATORS (AICD) 
 Pacemakers, AICDs, or combination units may be used in patients with a 
history of sudden death, heart failure, or cardiomyopathy. Malfunction can occur at any level of the device, including infection or hematoma in the pocket housing the device, lead infection/displacement, failure to pace, failure to sense, overpacing, or inappropriate defibrillation. Most pacemakers will have a magnetic switch which, when triggered by magnet application to 
the unit, will cause the pacemaker to function in a fixed asynchronous 
mode.
     Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Evaluation should include an ECG, electrolytes, and chest x-ray to 
assess lead position and integrity. Arrangements should be made for electrical interrogation of the unit.  
   2.    Patients with pacing failure may require treatment based on their under-
lying rhythm and associated symptoms.  
   3.    Patients with overpacing may require magnet application to convert the 
pacemaker to asynchronous mode pacing at a lower rate.          
 For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide  , 7th ed., 
see Chapter 22, “Cardiac Rhythm Disturbances,” by Joseph S. Piktel; Chapter 23, “Pharmacology of Antiarrhythmics,” by Brad A. Miller and Elizabeth A. Clements; and Chapter 24 “Pharmacology of Vasopressor Agents” by Brad A. Miller and
Elizabeth A. Clements.   
26  Resuscitation of Children 
and Neonates 
   Marc F.  Collin  
 Children primarily develop cardiac arrest secondary to hypoxia from respi-
ratory arrest or shock syndromes. Because of age and size differences among children, drug dosages, compression and respiratory rates, and equipment sizes differ considerably ( Table 3-1 ). 
 ■     PEDIATRIC CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION 
  Securing the Airway 
 The airway in infants and children is smaller, variable in size, and more 
anterior than that in the adult. The prominent occiput and relatively large tongue and epiglottis may lead to obstruction when the child is in the supine position. 
 Mild extension of the head in the sniffing position opens the airway. 
Chin lift or jaw thrust maneuvers may relieve obstruction of the airway 
related to the tongue. Oral airways are not commonly used in pediatrics but 
may be useful in the unconscious child who requires continuous jaw thrust or chin lift to maintain airway patency. Oral airways are inserted by direct visualization with a tongue blade. 
 A bag-valve-mask system is commonly used for ventilation. Mini-
mum volume for ventilation bags for infants and children is 450 mL. The tidal volume necessary to ventilate children is 10 to 15 mL/kilogram. Observation of chest rise and auscultation of breath sounds will ensure adequate ventilation. 
 Endotracheal intubation usually is performed with a Miller straight 
blade with a properly sized tube. Resuscitation measuring tapes have been 
found to be the most accurate for determining tube size. The formula 
16 plus age in years divided by 4 calculates approximate tube size. Uncuffed tubes are used in children up to 8 years. 
 Initiate ventilation at 20 breaths/min for infants, 15 breaths/min for 
young children, and 10 breaths/min for adolescents unless hyperventilation is required.  
  Rapid Sequence Intubation 
 Rapid sequence intubation is the administration of an intravenous (IV) 
induction agent with a neuromuscular blocking agent to facilitate endotra-cheal intubation. 
    1.    Prepare equipment, medication, and personnel before initiation of RSI. 
Check equipment function.  
   2.   Preoxygenate the patient with 100% oxygen.  
   3.    In children, cricoid pressure can occlude the pliable trachea. Release 
cricoid pressure, if applied, if laryngoscopy and intubation are difficult.  
   4.    Refer to  Table 3-2  for specific induction and paralytic agents used in 
children.
3 CHAPTER
27TABLE 3-1 Length-Based Equipment Chart (Length = Centimeters)∗
Item 54–70 70–85 85–95 95–107 107–124 124–138 138–155
Endotracheal tube size (mm) 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5Lip–tip length (mm) 10.5 12.0 13.5 15.0 16.5 18.0 19.5Laryngoscope 1 straight 1 straight 2 straight 2 straight or curved 2 straight or curved 2–3 straight or curved 3 straight or 
curved
Suction catheter 8F 8F–10F 10F 10F 10F 10F 12FStylet 6F 6F 6F 6F 14F 14F 14FOral airway Infant/small child Small child Child Child Child/small adult Child/adult Medium adultBag-valve mask Infant Child Child Child Child Child/adult AdultOxygen mask Newborn Pediatric Pediatric Pediatric Pediatric Adult AdultVascular access (gauge)
 Catheter 22–24 20–22 18–22 18–22 18–20 18–20 16–20 Butterfly 23–25 23–25 21–23 21–23 21–23 21–22 18–21
Nasogastric tube 5F–8F 8F–10F 10F 10F–12F 12F–14F 14F–18F 18FUrinary catheter 5F–8F 8F–10F 10F 10F–12F 10F–12F 12F 12FChest tube 10F–12F 16F–20F 20F–24F 20F–24F 24F–32F 28F–32F 32F–40FBlood pressure cuff Newborn/infant Infant/child Child Child Child Child/adult Adult
Directions for use: (1) measure patient length with centimeter tape; (2) using measured length in centimeters, access appropria te equipment column.
28 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
TABLE 3-2 Common Rapid-Sequence Intubation Medications in Children∗
Medication Dose †Comments
Induction agents
 Etomidate 0.3 milligram/kilogram Preserves hemodynamic stability; may 
 suppress adrenal axis even in a single dose; 
short acting, requires anxiolysis or analgesia after intubation
 Ketamine 1–2 milligrams/
kilogramBronchodilator, preserves respiratory drive, 
cardiovascular stimulant; drug of choice for intubation for asthma
 Propofol 1–2 milligrams/
kilogramRapid push, higher dose in infants, may 
cause hypotension; short acting, requires ongoing anxiolysis or analgesia after  intubation
Paralytics
 Rocuronium 1 milligram/kilogram Nondepolarizing agent; longer duration than 
succinylcholine
 Succinylcholine < 10 kilograms: 1.5–2.0 
milligrams/kilogram> 10 kilograms: 1.0–1.5 milligrams/kilogramShorter duration than rocuronium; better 
intubating conditions at 60 s; may cause bradycardia in children and hyperkalemic cardiac arrest in  children with undiagnosed neuromuscular disease
Sedatives
 Midazolam 0.1 milligram/kilogram Short-acting sedative Lorazepam 0.1 milligram/kilogram Longer-acting sedative
Analgesics
 Fentanyl 1–2 micrograms/
kilogramShort-acting analgesic; preserves 
 hemodynamic stability
 Morphine 0.1–0.2 milligram/
kilogramLonger-acting analgesic; may cause histamine 
release
∗Premedication is no longer routinely recommended in children due to a lack of supporting evidence.
†Rapid-sequence intubation medications can be given IO when IV access cannot be obtained.
        5.   Intubate the trachea, confirm proper placement, and secure the tube.  
   6 .      Atropine   0.02 milligram/kilogram (minimum dose, 0.1 milligram; 
maximum dose, 1 milligram) may be used for symptomatic reflex  bradycardia.    
  Vascular Access 
 Airway management is paramount in pediatric arrest and should not be 
delayed while obtaining vascular access. 
 Try peripheral veins (antecubital, hand, foot, or scalp) first. Intraosseous 
access is also a quick, safe, and reliable route for administering fluids and resuscitation medications. The proximal tibia is the most commonly used 
site. If peripheral IV or IO is unsuccessful, percutaneous access of the 
femoral vein or saphenous vein cutdown may be attempted. 
 There are several manual and mechanical devices available for IO inser-
tion. The insertion site is 1 to 3 cm below the anterior tibial tuberosity and in the middle of the anteromedial surface of the tibia. Using sterile tech nique, 
insert the device to penetrate the cortex. Then, remove the cannula from the 
CHAPTER 3: Resuscitation of Children and Neonates 29 
needle, confirm needle placement by aspirating bone marrow or infusing 
5 to 10 cc of saline, and secure the device. 
 Begin fluid resuscitation with rapid infusion of isotonic saline, 20 mL/
kilogram IV bolus. Repeat as needed. If shock or hypotension persist after several boluses, consider initiating a pressor.  
  Drugs 
 Proper drug dosages in children require knowledge of the patient’s weight. 
Use a length-based system when an exact weight is unavailable. 
 The rule of 6s may be used to quickly calculate continuous infusions of 
drugs such as dopamine and dobutamine. The calculation is 6 milligrams times weight in kilogram: fill to 100 mL with 5% dextrose in water. The infusion rate in mL per hour equals the micrograms per kilogram per min 
rate (ie, an infusion running at 1 mL/h = 1 microgram/kilogram/min, or 
5 mL/h = 5 micrograms/kilogram/min). 
  Epinephrine   is indicated in pulseless arrest and in hypoxia-induced 
bradycardia unresponsive to oxygenation and ventilation. The initial dose is 0.01 milligram/kilogram (0.1 mL/kilogram of 1:10,000 solution) IV/IO or 0.1 milligram/kilogram (0.1 mL/kilogram) of 1:1,000 solution by endo-tracheal route. Subsequent doses may be administered every 3 to 5 min as needed. 
 Consider sodium bicarbonate if ventilation, epinephrine, and chest com-
pressions fail to correct acidosis. 
 Calcium may be useful in treating hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, and 
calcium-channel blocker overdose. Calcium may be given as  calcium
 chloride  , 20 milligrams/kilogram (0.2 milligram/kilogram of 10% solution), or 
 calcium glu conate  , 60 to 100 milligrams/kilogram (0.6-1 milligram/
kilogram of 10% solution), via IV or IO route.  
  Dysrhythmias 
 Dysrhythmias in infants and children are most often the result of respiratory 
insufficiency or hypoxia. Careful attention to oxygenation and ventilation, along with correction of hypoxia, acidosis, and fluid balance, are the cor-nerstones of dysrhythmia management in children. 
  Tables 3-3 ,  3-4 ,  and  3-5  summarize electrical and drug therapies of 
unstable cardiac rhythms in children. 
TABLE 3-3 Treatment of Pediatric Bradycardia
1. If bradycardia causing cardiorespiratory compromise:
a. Provide oxygen and/or ventilation as necessary.b. If heart rate remains bradycardic (< 60) with poor perfusion, begin CPR.
2.  If symptomatic bradycardia persists, administer  epinephrine 0.01 milligram/kilogram 
(0.1 mL/kilogram of 1:10,000 concentration)   IV/IO and repeat every 3 to 5 min as 
necessary. ET epinephrine   0.1 milligram/kilogram (0.1 mL of 1:1000 concentration) 
may be used if IV access is unavailable. If bradycardia is due to increased vagal tone or primary AV conduction block, give atropine  : 0.02 milligram/kilogram (minimum dose, 
0.1 milligram; maximum dose, 1 milligram); may repeat.
3.  Consider  emergency pacing   in patients with complete heart block or sinus node dys-
function unresponsive to oxygenation, ventilation, chest compressions, and  medications.
4.  Identify and treat the underlying cause.
30 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
TABLE 3-4 Treatment of Pediatric Pulseless Arrest
1.  Initiate BLS; CPR; administer oxygen, attach monitor/defibrillator if available. If after any of 
the steps below the rhythm becomes stable, begin post-resuscitation efforts.
2.   If rhythm is shockable, ie, ventricular fibrillation (VF) or ventricular tachycardia (VT):
a.  Defibrillate once w/  2 J/kilogram  ; may use pediatric AED if > 1 y/o (1-8 year olds); 
Check rhythm.
b.  If unstable cardiac rhythm persists, resume CPR for 5 cycles. Interrupt only to administer
4 J/kilogram   (may use pediatric AED) for VF/VT. Give  epinephrine 0.01 milligram/
kilogram (0.1 mL of 1:10,000 concentration)   IV/IO and repeat every 3-5 min as neces-
sary. ET epinephrine   0.1 milligram/kilogram (0.1 mL of 1:1000 concentration) may be 
used if IV access is unavailable. Check rhythm.
c.  If unstable cardiac rhythm persists, resume CPR for 5 cycles. Interrupt only to administer 
4 J/kilogram   (may use pediatric AED) for VF/VT. Consider  amiodarone   5 milligrams/
kilogram IV/IO, lidocaine   1 milligram/kilogram IV/IO,  magnesium   25-50 milligrams/
kilogram IV/IO. Treat reversible causes. Check rhythm.
d.  Repeat steps b and c until stable rhythm or decision to discontinue resuscitation.
3.  If rhythm is not shockable, ie asystole:
a.  Resume CPR. Give  epinephrine 0.01 milligram/kilogram (0.1 mL of 1:10,000 
concentration)   IV/IO and repeat every 3-5 min as necessary.  ET epinephrine   0.1 mil-
ligram/kilogram (0.1 mL of 1:1000 concentration) may be used if IV access is unavail-able. Check rhythm.
b.  If asystole persists, repeat step above until a treatable rhythm develops or decision to 
discontinue resuscitation.
TABLE 3-5 Treatment of Pediatric Tachycardia With Poor Perfusion
Provide oxygen and ventilation as necessary. Attach monitor/defibrillator if available; perform 
ECG and evaluate QRS duration.
NARROW COMPLEX QRS (< 0.09 sec)Sinus tachycardia:
 a. Identify and treat underlying cause. b.  ECG reveals normal P waves, variable R-R intervals, constant P-R intervals; infant rate 
 usually < 220 bpm; child rate usually < 180 bpm)
Supraventricular tachycardia:
 a.  Try  vagal maneuvers first  ; if unsuccessful, administer  adenosine  , 0.1 milligram/
kilogram (maximum, 6 milligrams) by rapid IV push; if unsuccessful, double dose to 0.2 milligram/kilogram (maximum, 12 milligrams).
 b.  Another option is  synchronized cardioversion  , 0.5-1 J/kilogram. If unsuccessful, double 
to 1-2 J/kilogram. Sedate patient, if possible.
 c.  EKG reveals absent/abnormal P waves, HR not variable (infant rate usually > 220 bpm; 
child rate usually > 180 bpm)
WIDE COMPLEX QRS( ≥ 0.09 sec  )
Ventricular tachycardia:
 1.  Perform  synchronized cardioversion  , 0.5-1 J/kilogram. Sedate if possible. Consider 
giving adenosine   if electrical cardioversion is not delayed.
 2.  Other options include  amiodarone  , 5 milligrams/kilogram IV over 20-60 min or  
procainamide  , 15 milligrams/kilogram IV over 30-60 min. 
 3.  Expert consultation is advised.
CHAPTER 3: Resuscitation of Children and Neonates 31 
 The most common rhythm seen in pediatric arrest is bradycardia leading 
to asystole. Oxygenation and ventilation will often correct this problem. 
Epinephrine may be useful if the child is unresponsive to this respiratory 
intervention. 
  The next most common dysrhythmia in children is narrow complex supra-
ventricular tachycardia (SVT), with rates between 250 and 350 beats per min. On EKG, p waves are either absent or abnormal. It may be difficult to distin-guish between a fast sinus tachycardia and SVT. The presence of normal p waves is strongly suggestive of sinus tachycardia rather than SVT. Young infants may have sinus tachycardia with rates faster than 200 beats/min. Patients with sinus tachycardia may have a history of fever, dehydration, or 
shock, while SVT is usually associated with a vague, nonspecific history. 
    Defibrillation and Cardioversion 
 Ventricular fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia are rare in children. 
When present, immediate defibrillation at 2 J/kilogram is recommended followed by 1 to 2 min of CPR (5 cycles of 15:2 compressions and ventila-tions) to restore coronary perfusion and improve oxygen delivery to the myocardium before additional attempts at defibrillation. If the first defibril-lation attempt is unsuccessful, double the energy to 4 J/kilogram for each 
subsequent attempt. 
 Synchronized cardioversion, 0.5 J/kilogram, is used to treat other 
unstable tachydysrhythmias. Double the energy level to 1 J/kilogram, if the first attempt is unsuccessful. 
 Use the largest pads or paddles that still allow contact of the entire 
paddle with the chest wall. When using paddles, electrode cream or paste is used to prevent burns. One paddle is placed on the right of the sternum at the second intercostal space, and the other is placed at the left midcla-vicular line at the level of the xiphoid.   
 ■  NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 
     1.    The first step in neonatal resuscitation is to maintain body temperature. 
Dry the infant and place on a radiant warmer. If available, place the limbs and torso of very-low-birth-weight newborns (< 1500 grams) in specially developed polyethylene bags to help maintain normothermia.  
    2.    Reserve immediate suctioning for babies who have obvious obstruc-
tion to spontaneous breathing or who require positive-pressure ventila-
tion. If needed, suction the mouth and then the nose with a bulb syringe or mechanical suction device. Routine deep suctioning is not recommended as it may result in vagally induced bradycardia.  
    3.    Aspiration of meconium-stained amniotic fluid may result in both 
morbidity and mortality. If the infant is vigorous after delivery, do not suction the mouth, nares, or airway. If the infant is depressed after delivery, perform direct tracheal suctioning using direct laryngoscopic visualization and an endotracheal tube fitted with a meconium-suctioning adapter. If attempted intubation is prolonged and unsuccessful, aban-
don further attempts and begin bag-mask ventilation if the heart rate is 
< 100 beats/min.  
    4.    Assess heart rate, respiratory effort, color, and activity quickly over the 
next 5 to 10 seconds. If the infant is apneic or the heart rate is slow 
32 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
(< 100 beats/min), administer positive-pressure ventilation using bag-
mask ventilation. For term babies, begin resuscitation with room air rather than 100% oxygen. Use pulse oximetry to guide the use of supplementary oxygen. 
      If the baby is bradycardic (HR< 60 beats/min) after 90 seconds of 
resuscitation with room air or with blended oxygen, increase the oxygen concentration to 100% until heart rate is normalized. Provide  assisted ventilation at rates of 40 to 60 breaths/min. Begin with an  inflation pres-sure of about 20 cm H 
2 O. Pressures as high as 30 to 40 cm H 2 O may be 
required initially in some term infants if chest rise is inadequate and the baby is not responding. However, high inflation pressures may result in pneumothorax, especially in premature infants. 
    5.    If no improvement is noted after 30 seconds of bag-mask ventilation 
or the infant’s condition deteriorates further, perform endotracheal 
intubation and ventilation. CO 
2  detectors aid in determining whether 
the baby is properly intubated but color change is dependent on ade-quate circulation. Proper tube placement can also be determined by noting good chest rise, visualization of vapor steam in the endotracheal tube, and auscultation.  
    6.    If the heart rate is still slower than 60 beats/min after intubation and 
assisted ventilation for 30 seconds, begin cardiac compressions at 90 
chest compressions and 30 breaths each min (3:1 ratio). The ‘2 thumb-encircling hands’ technique is preferred to the ‘2-finger’ technique when performing chest compressions.  
    7.    If there is still no improvement in heart rate, initiate drug therapy. 
Vascular access may be obtained peripherally or via the umbilical vein. The most expedient procedure in the neonate is to place a catheter in the umbilical vein and advance to 10 to 12 cm or until free flow of blood is seen in the catheter.  
    8.    Push  epinephrine  , 0.01 to 0.03 milligram/kilogram of 1:10,000 solution 
IV , which equals 0.1 to 0.3 mL/kilogram, if the heart rate is still slower 
than 60 beats/min despite adequate ventilation and oxygenation. Repeat 
every 3 to 5 min if necessary. IV administration is preferred to intratra-cheal administration.  
    9.    Initiate volume expansion with normal saline (or Type O/Rh negative 
blood, if available), 10 to 20 mL/kilogram, if hypovolemia is suspected on the basis of pallor, slow capillary refill time, weak pulses, and/or inadequate response to other measures.  
   10.     Sodium bicarbonate   during neonatal resuscitation remains controver-
sial and is generally not administered during initial resuscitation. A dose of 1 mEq/kilogram of a 4.2% solution (0.5 mEq/mL) IV may be 
given if there is a significant metabolic acidosis; this therapy should be 
guided by blood gas values.  
   11.    Naloxone is not recommended in the resuscitation for newborns with 
respiratory depression. 
 For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th  ed., see 
Chapter 14, “Resuscitation of Neonates,” by Marc F. Collin; Chapter 15, “Resuscita-
tion of Children,” by William E. Hauda II; and Chapter 29, “Pediatric Airway Management,” by Robert J. Vissers.   
33Fluids, Electrolytes, and 
Acid-Base Disorders 
   Mary A.  Wittler        
 ■  FLUIDS 
 When altered, fluids and electrolytes should be corrected in the following 
order: ( a ) volume; ( b ) pH; ( c ) potassium, calcium, and magnesium; and 
(d ) sodium and chloride. Reestablishment of tissue perfusion often equilibrates 
the fluid-electrolyte and acid-base balances. Because the osmolarity of normal saline (NS) matches that of serum, it is an excellent fluid for volume replace-ment. Hypotonic fluids such as 5% dextrose in water (D5W) should never be 
used to replace volume. Lactated Ringer solution is commonly used for surgi-
cal patients or trauma patients; however, only NS can be given in the same line with blood components. D5½NS, with or without potassium, is given as a maintenance fluid. The more concentrated dextrose solutions, D10W or D20W, are used for patients with compromised ability to mobilize glucose stores, such as patients with hepatic failure, or as part of total parental nutrition solutions. 
 ■  CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF VOLUME STATUS 
 V olume loss and dehydration can be inferred by the patient history. Historical 
features include: vomiting, diarrhea, fever, adverse working conditions, decreased fluid intake, chronic disease, altered level of consciousness, and reduced urine output. Tachycardia and hypotension are late signs of dehydra-tion. On physical examination, one may find dry mucosa, shrunken tongue (excellent indicator), and decreased skin turgor. In infants and children, 
sunken fontanelles, decreased capillary refill, lack of tears, and decreased wet 
diapers are typical signs and symptoms of dehydration. Lethargy and coma are more ominous signs and may indicate a significant comorbid condition. Laboratory values are not reliable indicators of fluid status. Plasma and urine osmolarity are perhaps the most reliable measures of dehydration. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, hematocrit, and other chemistries are insensitive. 
 V olume overload is a purely clinical diagnosis and presents with edema 
(central or peripheral), respiratory distress (pulmonary edema), and jugular venous distention (in congestive heart failure). The significant risk factors for volume overload are renal, cardiovascular, and liver diseases. Blood 
pressure does not necessarily correlate with volume status alone; patients 
with volume overload can present with hypotension or hypertension.  
 ■  MAINTENANCE FLUIDS 
   •   Adult: D5½NS at 75 to 125 mL/h + 20 mEq/L potassium chloride for an 
average adult (approximately 70 kilograms). 
  •   Children: D5½NS or D10½NS, 100 mL/kilogram/d for the first 10 kilograms 
of body weight, 50 mL/kilogram/d for the second 10 kilograms, and 20 mL/kilogram/d for every kilograms thereafter. (See  Chapter 81  for 
further discussion of pediatric fluid management.) 
4 CHAPTER  
34 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
 ■  ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS 
 If the clinical picture and the laboratory data conflict, repeat the lab test prior 
to initiating therapy. Correcting a single abnormality may not be the only intervention needed because most electrolytes exist in equilibrium with others. Abnormalities should be corrected at the same rate they develop; however, slower correction is usually safe unless the condition warrants rapid or early 
intervention (eg, hypoglycemia or hyperkalemia). Evaluation of electrolyte 
disorders frequently requires a comparison of the measured and calculated osmolarities (number of particles per liter of solution). To calculate osmolarity, measured serum values in mEq/L are used: 
 osmolarity (mOsm/L) = 2 [Na 
+ ] + (glucose/18) + (BUN/2.8) + (ETOH/4.6) 
  Hyponatremia ([Na + ] < 135 mEq/L) 
  Clinical Features 
 The clinical manifestations of hyponatremia occur when the [Na + ] drops 
below 120 mEq/L; they include nausea, weakness, headache, agitation,  hallucinations, cramps, confusion, lethargy, and seizures.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Evaluate volume status and measured and calculated serum osmolarities. 
True hyponatremia presents with reduced osmolarity and is further dif-ferentiated based on volume status and urine [Na 
+ ]. This state results from 
primary water gain, [Na+] loss greater then that of water, or alteration in 
the distribution of water. Factitious hyponatremia (false low measurement of the serum sodium) is due to hyperglycemia, hyperproteinemia, hyper-lipidemia, and other osmotically active solutes and is associated with a normal to high osmolarity. The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone, characterized by hyponatremia, inappropriately elevated urine 
osmolality despite low serum osmolarity, elevated urine sodium, and 
clinical euvolemia, is a diagnosis of exclusion. Causes of hyponatremia are listed in  Table 4-1 . 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.   Correct existing volume or perfusion deficits with NS.  
   2.    In euvolemic or hypervolemic patients, restrict fluids (500 to 1500 mL 
of water daily)  
   3.    In severe hyponatremia ([Na 
+ ] <120 mEq/L) that has developed rapidly 
with central nervous system (CNS) changes such as coma or seizures, give  hypertonic saline,   3% NS (513 mEq/L), at 25 to 100 mL/h. The 
[Na
+ ] should not be corrected faster than 0.5 mEq/L/h in chronic hypo-
natremia or 1.0 mEq/L/h in acute hyponatremia. The [Na + ] correction 
should not exceed 12 mEq/L/day.  
   4.    The sodium dose can be calculated as follows: weight (kilograms) × 0.6 × 
(desired [Na + ] − measured [Na + ]) = sodium deficit (mEq).  
   5.    Complications of rapid correction include congestive heart failure 
(CHF) and central pontine myelinolysis. 
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  35 
  Hypernatremia ([Na + ] > 150 mEq/L) 
  Clinical Features 
 An osmolarity increase of 2% stimulates thirst to prevent hypernatremia. 
Symptoms of hypernatremia are usually noticeable at a serum osmolarity > 350 or [Na 
+ ] > 158 mEq/L. Initial symptoms include irritability, tremulous-
ness, and ataxia. Lethargy, coma, and seizures may be seen with osmolarities above 400. Morbidity and mortality are highest in infants and the elderly who may be unable to respond to increased thirst.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Hypernatremia is most commonly caused by a decrease in total body water 
due to decreased intake or excessive loss. It is less often due to an increase in total body [Na 
+ ]. Common causes are GI loss, hyperpyrexia, and exces-
sive sweating. An important etiology of hypernatremia is diabetes insipidus (DI), which results in the loss of hypotonic urine. Central DI (no antidi-uretic hormone secreted) results from CNS disease, surgery, or trauma. Nephrogenic DI (unresponsive to antidiuretic hormone) results from 
 congenital disease, drugs, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, or renal disease. The 
causes of hypernatremia are listed in  Table 4-2 . TABLE 4-1 Causes of Hyponatremia
Hypotonic (true) hyponatremia (P osm  < 275)
Hypovolemic hyponatremia
Extrarenal losses (urinary [Na + ] < 20 mEq/L)
Volume replacement with hypotonic fluidsSweating, vomiting, diarrhea, fistulaThird-space sequestration (burns, peritonitis, pancreatitis)
Renal losses (urinary [Na +] > 20 mEq/L)
Diuretic useAldosterone deficiencySalt-wasting nephropathies; renal tubular acidosisOsmotic diuresis (mannitol, hyperglycemia, hyperuricemia)
Euvolemic hyponatremia (urinary [Na +] usually > 20 mEq/L)
Inappropriate ADH secretion (CNS, lung, or carcinoma disease)Physical and emotional stress or painMyxedema, Addison disease, Sheehan syndromeDrugs, water intoxication
Hypervolemic hyponatremia
Urinary [Na +] > 20 mEq/L
Renal failure (inability to excrete free water)
Urinary [Na +] < 20 mEq/L
CirrhosisCongestive heart failureNephrotic syndrome
Isotonic (pseudo) hyponatremia (P 
osm  275–295)
Hyperproteinemia, hyperlipidemia
Hypertonic hyponatremia (P osm  > 295)
Hyperglycemia, mannitol excess and glycerol use
 Key:  ADH = antidiuretic hormone, CNS = central nervous system.
36 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
    1.    Correct existing volume or perfusion deficits with NS or Lactated 
Ringer solution. Free water deficits are corrected with ½NS. Avoid lowering the [Na 
+ ] more than 10 mEq/L/day.  
   2.    Each liter of water deficit causes the [Na + ] to increase 3 to 5 mEq/L. Use 
the formula to calculate the free water deficit: water deficit (L) = (measured 
[Na+ ]/desired [Na + ]) − 1. 
   3.    If no urine output is observed after NS or lactated Ringer solution rehy-
dration, rapidly switch to ½ NS: unload the body of the extra sodium by using a diuretic (eg,  furosemide   20 to 40 milligrams IV).  
   4.    Central diabetes insipidus  DI  is treated with  desmopressin   with careful 
monitoring of electrolytes, urine osmolarity, and specific gravity. Consult 
a specialist.  
   5.    In children with a serum sodium level higher than 180 mEq/L, consider 
peritoneal dialysis using high-glucose, low-[Na 
+ ] dialysate in consulta-
tion with a pediatric nephrologist (see Chapter 81 for further discussion).     
  Hypokalemia ([K + ] < 3.5 mEq/L) 
  Clinical Features 
 The signs and symptoms of hypokalemia usually occur at levels below 
2.5 mEq/L and affect the following body systems: the CNS (weakness, cramps, hyporeflexia, paresthesias), gastrointestinal system (ileus), cardiovas-cular system (dysrhythmias, worsening of digoxin toxicity, hypotension or hypertension, U waves, ST-segment depression, and prolonged QT interv al),TABLE 4-2 Causes of Hypernatremia
Loss of water
Reduced water intake
Defective thirst driveUnconsciousnessInability to drink waterLack of access to water
Water loss in excess of sodium
Vomiting, diarrheaSweating, feverDiabetes insipidusDrugs including lithium, phenytoinDialysisOsmotic diuresis, renal concentrating defectsThyrotoxicosisSevere burns
Gain of sodium
Increased intake
Increased salt use, salt pillsHypertonic saline ingestion or infusionSodium bicarbonate administration
Mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid excess
Primary aldosteronismCushing syndrome
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  37 
and renal system (metabolic alkalosis and increased ammonia production); 
glucose intolerance also can develop.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Causes can be grouped by decreased [K + ] intake, increased [K + ] excretion, 
or transcellular shift. The most common cause is the use of loop diuretics.  Table 4-3  lists the causes. 
      Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    A 20 mEq/dose [K 
+ ] will raise the [K + ] by 0.25 mEq/L.  
   2.    In stable patients, oral replacement is preferred (safe and rapid); a 20 to 
40 mEq [K + ] dose is used.   
 3.  In unstable patients, IV Potassium chloride  (KCl in doses of 10 to 
20 mEq/h may be given). Add no more than 40 mEq of KCl to each liter of IV fluid. Infusion rates should not exceed 40 mEq/hr. Doses greater than 20 mEq/h should be given through a central line. Patients should be 
monitored continuously for dysrhythmias.   
  Hyperkalemia ([K 
+ ] > 5.5 mEq/L) 
  Clinical Features 
 The most concerning and serious manifestations of hyperkalemia are the 
cardiac effects. At levels of 6.5 to 7.5 mEq/L, the electrocardiogram (ECG) shows peaked T waves (precordial leads) and prolonged PR and short QT intervals. At levels of 7.5 to 8.0 mEq/L, the QRS widens and the P wave flat-tens. At levels above 8 mEq/L, a sine-wave pattern, ventricular fibrillation, TABLE 4-3 Causes of Hypokalemia
Shift into the cell
Alkalosis and sodium bicarbonate
β-Adrenergics
Administration of insulin and glucoseHypokalemic periodic paralysis
Reduced intakeIncreased loss
Renal loss
Primary & secondary hyperaldosteronism, Bartter syndromeDiuretics, osmotic disuresis, postobstructive diuresisRenal tubular acidosisRenal artery stenosis
Miscellaneous
Licorice useUse of chewing tobaccoHypercalcemiaLiddle syndromeMagnesium deficiencyAcute leukemiaDrugs and toxins (PCN, lithium, 
L-dopa, theophylline)
GI loss (vomiting, diarrhea, fistulas), malabsorption
 Key:  GI = gastrointestinal, PCN = penicillin.
38 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
and heart blocks occur. Neuromuscular symptoms include weakness and 
paralysis. Gastrointestinal symptoms include vomiting, colic, and diarrhea. 
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Beware of pseudohyperkalemia, which is caused by hemolysis after blood 
draws. Renal failure with oliguria is the most common cause of true hyper-kalemia. Appropriate tests for management include an ECG, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, arterial blood gases (check for acidosis), urine analy-sis, and a digoxin level in appropriate patients. Causes of hyperkalemia are 
listed in  Table 4-4 . 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition 
     1.    Symptomatic patients are treated in a stepwise approach: stabilize the 
cardiac membrane with CaCl 
2  or Ca-gluconate; shift [K + ] into the cell 
using glucose and insulin and/or bicarbonate and/or albuterol; enhance [K
+ ] excretion by using sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate), 
diuretics, or dialysis in severe cases.  
    2.    For levels over 7.0 mEq/L or if there are any ECG changes, give: IV 
calcium chloride (10%)   5 to10 mL or IV  calcium gluconate (10%)   10 
to 20 mL. In children, give calcium gluconate (10%) 0.5 mL/kilogram. 
    3.    The presence of digoxin toxicity with hyperkalemia is an indication for 
digoxin immune Fab therapy (see  Chapter 108 ). Avoid using calcium.  TABLE 4-4 Causes of Hyperkalemia
Factitious
Laboratory errorHemolysis and leukocytosis
Increased plasma [K 
+ ] load
Exogenous: diet, salt substitutes, [K + ] containing medications
Endogenous: hemolysis, GI bleeding, catabolic states, crush injury
Decreased [K + ] excretion
Renal failureImpaired renin-aldosterone axis
Addison diseasePrimary hypoaldosteronism
Other (heparin, ACE inhibitors, prostaglandin inhibitors)
Tubular potassium secretory defect
Sickle cell diseaseSystemic lupus erythematosusPostrenal transplantationObstructive uropathyPotassium sparing diuretics
Abnormal potassium distribution
Insulin deficiencyHypertonicity (hyperglycemia)
β-Adrenergic blockers
Exercise
Drugs: succinylcholine, β-agonists, digitalis intoxication
Acidosis
 Key:  GI = gastrointestinal.
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  39 
    4.    In acidotic patients, consider giving 50 to 100 mEq of  sodium bicar-
bonate slow IV.  In children 1 to 2 mEq/kilogram is given slow IV .  
    5.    Give 50 mL (25 grams) of  D50W   with 10 to 20 units regular  insulin   IV 
push (5 to 10 units in dialysis patients). In children, give 0.5 to 1 gram/kilogram of glucose as D10W plus insulin 0.1 units/kilogram. 
    6.    Diuresis is maintained with  furosemide   20 to 40 milligrams IV .  
    7 .      Kayexalate   (PO or rectal [PR]) 1 gram binds 1 mEq [K 
+ ]. Administer 
Kayexalate 15 to 30g PO with sorbitol or 30 to 50 grams PR with sorbi-tol. Sorbitol is used because Kayexalate is constipating. Kayexalate can exacerbate CHF. In children, give Kayexalate 1gram/kilogram PO or PR.  
    8.    In patients with acute renal failure, consult a nephrologist for emergent 
dialysis.
    9 .      Albuterol   5 to 10 milligrams by nebulization may also be used to lower [K 
+ ].  
   10.    Kayexalate and insulin/glucose therapies last several hours; all other 
therapies (except hemodialysis) have transient effects. Frequent moni-toring of [K 
+ ] should occur.     
  Hypocalcemia ([Ca 2+ ] < 8.5 mEq/L or ionized level < 2.0 mEq/L) 
  Clinical Features 
 The signs and symptoms of hypocalcemia are usually seen with ionized 
[Ca2+ ] levels below 1.5 mEq/L. Symptoms include paresthesias, increased 
deep tendon reflexes (DTRs), cramps, weakness, confusion, and seizures. Patients also may demonstrate the Chvostek sign (twitch of the corner of mouth on tapping with finger over cranial nerve VII at the zygoma) or the Trousseau sign (more reliable; carpal spasm when the blood pressure cuff is left inflated at a pressure above the systolic blood pressure for longer 
than 3 min). Alkalosis decreases the ionized [Ca 
2+ ] fraction (physiologi-
cally active form) without changing the total calcium level. Low [Ca 2+ ] 
decreases myocardial contractility, so patients may present with CHF or prolonged QT intervals on the ECG.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Causes include: shock, sepsis, fat embolism, renal failure, pancreatitis, 
drugs (usually cimetidine), hypoparathyroidism, hyperphosphatemia, vita-min D deficiency, hypomagnesemia, and fluoride poisoning.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    If asymptomatic, use  calcium gluconate   tablets 1 to 4 grams/d PO 
divided every 6 hours with or without  vitamin D   (calcitriol 0.2 micro-
grams two times a day). Milk is not a good substitute.  
   2.    In symptomatic patients or those with severe hypocalcemia, give calcium 
gluconate , orcalcium chloride,   10 mL 10% solution IV slowly over 
10 min.  
   3.   Replace magnesium in conjunction with [Ca 
2+ ] .      
  Hypercalcemia ([Ca 2+ ] > 10.5 mEq/L or ionized [Ca 2+ ] > 2.7 mEq/L) 
 Several factors affect the serum calcium level: parathyroid hormone increases 
calcium and decreases phosphate; calcitonin and vitamin D metabolites 
40 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
decrease calcium. Decreased [H + ] causes a decrease in ionized [Ca 2+ ]. A 
decrease in albumin causes a decrease in [Ca 2+ ] but not in the ionized portion. 
  Clinical Features 
 Clinical signs and symptoms develop at levels above 12 milligrams/dL. Patients 
often have profound volume depletion; concomitant electrolyte abnormalities are frequent. A mnemonic to aid recall of common hypercalcemia symptoms is stones   (renal calculi),  bones   (osteolysis),  psychic moans   (lethargy, weakness, 
fatigue, and confusion), and  abdominal groans   (abdominal pain, constipation, 
polyuria, and polydipsia). ECG changes include depressed ST segments, wid-
ened T waves, shortened QT intervals, and heart blocks. 
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Most cases of hypercalcemia are due to hyperparathyroidism or malig-
nancy. A mnemonic to aid recall of the common causes is  PAM P . 
SCHMIDT:    p arathyroid hormone,  A ddison disease,  m ultiple myeloma, 
P aget disease,  s arcoidosis,  c ancer,  h yperthyroidism,  m ilk-alkali syndrome, 
i mmobilization, excess vitamin  D , and  t hiazides.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Initiate treatment in patients with severe symptoms, [Ca 
2+ ] above 14 milligrams/
dL, or significant dehydration. Restore fluid deficits, enhance calcium 
elimination, and decrease osteoclastic activity.  
   2.    Correct fluid deficits with NS; several liters may be required. Correct 
concomitant electrolyte abnormalities cautiously.  
   3.    Loop diuretics inhibit the renal resorption of [Ca 2+ ], but worsen dehydra-
tion and other electrolyte abnormalities. They are no longer recommended for malignancy-related hypercalcemia. In isolated cases, furosemide (10 to 40 milligrams IV) may be administered after fluid deficits are corrected, with careful attention to avoid dehydration. Thiazide diuretics should not be used.  
   4.    Drugs that inhibit osteoclastic activity include the bisphosphonates, 
calcitonin, and glucocorticoids. Recommendations for initiating therapy in the ED are lacking; consultation with a specialist is advised.     
  Hypomagnesemia 
  Clinical Findings 
 [Mg 
2+ ], [K + ], and [PO 4− ] move together intra- and extracellularly. Hypo-
magnesemia presents with CNS symptoms (depression, vertigo, ataxia, seizures, increased DTR, or tetany) or cardiac symptoms (arrhythmias, prolonged PR, QRS and QT, or worsening of digitalis effects). Also seen are anemia, hypotension, hypothermia, and dysphagia.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 In adults, the most common cause is alcoholism, followed by poor nutri-
tion, cirrhosis, pancreatitis, correction of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), excessive gastrointestinal losses, and renal wasting (especially diurectic use). Severe [Mg 
2+ ] depletion can occur before significant laboratory 
changes are seen. 
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  41 
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Correct volume deficits and other electrolyte abnormalities. Oral [Mg 2+ ] 
replacement is sufficient for most patients.  
   2.    In patients with severe symptoms and normal renal function, administer 
2 grams magnesium sulfate IV   over an hour, followed by 6 grams over 
the first 24 hours. Continuous cardiac monitoring and frequent DTR 
checks are recommended. 
  Hypermagnesemia 
  Clinical Findings 
 Signs and symptoms manifest progressively: nausea and somnolence occur 
first, followed by muscle weakness and loss of DTRs. Respiratory depres-sion, hypotension, heart block, and cardiac arrest occur at progressively higher magnesium levels.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Hypermagnesemia is rare. Common causes are renal failure with concomi-
tant ingestion of [Mg 
2+ ]-containing preparations (antacids) and lithium 
ingestion. Serum levels are diagnostic. Hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia often present concurrently.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    In many patients, stopping [Mg 
2+ ] intake is sufficient. More aggressive 
therapy includes rehydration with NS.  
   2.    In severely symptomatic patients, give 5 mL (10% solution) of  calcium
chloride   IV to antagonize the effects of magnesium.      
 ■  ACID-BASE PROBLEMS 
  Initial Assessment 
  Clinical Features 
 Several conditions should alert the clinician to possible acid-base disorders: 
history of renal, endocrine, or psychiatric disorders (drug ingestion); or signs of acute disease: tachypnea, cyanosis, Kussmaul respiration, respira-tory failure, shock, changes in mental status, vomiting, diarrhea, or other acute fluid losses. 
 Acidosis is due to gain of acid or loss of alkali; causes may be metabolic 
(fall in serum [HCO 
3− ]) or respiratory (rise in PCO 2 ). Alkalosis is due to 
loss of acid or addition of base and is metabolic (rise in serum [HCO 3− ]) or 
respiratory (fall in PCO 2 ). The lungs and kidneys primarily maintain the 
acid–base regulation. Metabolic disorders prompt an immediate compensa-tory change in ventilation, thereby venting CO 
2  in cases of metabolic 
acidosis or retaining it in cases of metabolic alkalosis. The effect of the kidneys in response to metabolic disorders is to excrete the hydrogen ion (with chloride) and recuperate [HCO 
3− ], a process that requires hours to 
days. The compensatory mechanisms of the lungs and kidneys will return the pH toward, but not to, normal.  
42 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Diagnosis and differential must begin with defining the nature of the acid-
base disorder (with the stepwise approach below) and then determining the most likely etiology from the differential listings in each section that fol-lows. In a mixed disorder, the pH, PCO 
2 , and [HCO 3− ] may be normal, and 
the only clue to a metabolic acidosis is a widened anion gap (AG, see step 4 below).   
  Stepwise Method of Acid-Base Clinical Problem Solving 
 Use the patient’s pre-illness values as a baseline if available; otherwise, a pH of 
7.4, [HCO 
3 ] of 24 mEq/L, and PCO 2  of 40 mm Hg can be considered normal. 
    1.  Examine the pH for acidemia (pH < 7.4) or alkalemia (pH > 7.4).  
   2.  Establish the primary mechanism by evaluating the [HCO 3− ] and PCO 2 .
    •   Metabolic acidosis: pH < 7.4 and [HCO 3− ] < 24 meQ/L 
  •   Metabolic alkalosis: pH > 7.4 and [HCO 3− ] > 24 meQ/L 
  •   Respiratory acidosis: pH < 7.4 and PCO 2  > 40 mm Hg 
  •   Respiratory alkalosis: pH > 7.4 and PCO 2  < 40 mm Hg 
   3.   Calculate the AG: [Na + ] − ([Cl − ] + [HCO 3− ]) = approximately 10 to 12 mEq/L 
is normal.    •    If the AG is increased compared with the known previous value or 
greater than 15, then an anion gap metabolic acidosis is present. 
  •    If the AG is unchanged and a metabolic acidosis is present (low [HCO 
3− ]), 
then a normal anion gap (or hyperchloremic) acidosis is present. 
   4.   For anion gap metabolic acidosis, evaluate for a concomitant hidden 
metabolic process: each 1 mEq/L decrease in [HCO 3− ] results in a 
1 mEq/L increase in AG. Compare the Δ Gap ( = present gap −12) to the 
Δ [HCO 3− ] (= 24 − present [HCO 3− ]).
    •    Δ Gap =Δ [HCO 3− ]: pure anion gap metabolic acidosis 
  •    Δ Gap > Δ [HCO 3− ]: concomitant metabolic alkalosis is likely present 
  •    Δ Gap < Δ [HCO 3− ]: concomitant non-AG acidosis is likely present 
   5.   Estimate the compensatory response for the primary process. If the 
compensatory response is not as expected, then the compensatory mechanism requires more time for complete mobilization or a secondary acid-base disturbance exists.    •    Metabolic acidosis: expected PCO 
2= (1.5 × [HCO 3− ] + 8) ± 2. A simpler 
observation is the PCO 2  decreases by 1 mm Hg for every 1 mEq/dL 
decrease in [HCO 3− ]. This process takes 12 to 24 hrs. 
  •   Metabolic alkalosis: expected PCO 2=  0.9 [HCO 3− ] + 16. 
  •   For either of above formulas, if:
•     Current PCO 2= expected PCO 2 : normal respiratory compensation 
•    Current PCO 2  < expected PCO 2 : possible concomitant respiratory 
alkalosis 
•    Current PCO 2  > expected PCO 2 : possible concomitant respiratory 
acidosis 
  •    Respiratory acidosis: clinically judge whether the process is acute 
(< 72 hrs) or chronic (> 72 hrs). The [HCO 3− ] increases 1mEq/L (acute) 
or 4 mEq/L (chronic) for every 10 mm Hg increase in PCO 2 . 
  •    Respiratory alkalosis: clinically judge whether the process is acute 
(72 hrs) or chronic (> 72 hrs). The [HCO 3− ] decreases 2mEq/L (acute) 
or 5 mEq/L (chronic) for every 10 mm Hg decrease in PCO 2 . 
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  43
  •    For either of above formulas, if:
•      Current [HCO 3− ] = expected [HCO 3− ]: normal metabolic compensation. 
•    Current [HCO 3− ] < expected [HCO 3− ]: possible concomitant meta-
bolic acidosis. 
•    Current [HCO 3− ] > expected [HCO 3− ]: possible concomitant meta-
bolic alkalosis. 
   6.   See the sections below for determining the etiology and management.    
  Metabolic Acidosis 
 Metabolic acidosis should be divided into an increased and normal AG 
acidosis. The term  anion gap   is misleading because the serum has no gap 
between total positive and negative ions; however, the unmeasured anions exceed the unmeasured cations. 
  Clinical Features 
 No matter the etiology, acidosis can cause nausea and vomiting, abdominal 
pain, change in sensorium, and tachypnea, sometimes a Kussmaul respira-tory pattern. Acidosis causes many negative physiologic effects that result in hypoxia. Patients may present with nonspecific complaints or shock.  
  Diagnosis and Differential 
 Causes of metabolic acidosis can be divided into 2 main groups: ( a ) those 
associated with increased production of organic acids ( Table 4-5 ); and (b ) those associated with a loss of [HCO 
3− ], failure to excrete [H + ], or addition 
of [H + ] ( Table 4-6 ). 
  Causes of anion gap metabolic acidosis include renal failure, lactic 
 acidosis, ketoacidosis, and toxins. A mnemonic to aid the recall of the causes of increased AG metabolic acidosis is:  A MUD PILES: a  lcohol, 
m ethanol,  u remia,  D KA,  p araldehyde,  i ron and  i soniazid,  l actic  a cidosis, 
e thylene  g lycol,  s alicylates, and  s tarvation. Caution should be used when 
TABLE 4-5 Causes of High Anion-Gap Metabolic Acidosis
Lactic acidosis
Type A: Decrease in tissue oxygenationType B: Normal tissue oxygenation
Renal failure (acute or chronic)Ketoacidosis
DiabetesAlcoholismProlonged starvation (mild acidosis)High-fat diet (mild acidosis)
Ingestion of toxic substances
Elevated osmolar gap
MethanolEthylene glycol
Normal osmolar gap
SalicylateParaldehydeCyanide
44 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
applying the A MUD PILES   mnemonic because the presence of alcohol in 
the patient’s blood does not rule out a more serious cause of acidosis. Iron 
and isoniazid exert their effects on the AG due to lactic acidosis. Causes of 
normal anion gap acidosis include GI or renal loss of [HCO 3− ]. A  mnemonic 
that can aid the recall of normal AG metabolic acidosis is  USED CARP:
u reterostomy,  s mall bowel fistulas,  e xtra chloride,  d iarrhea,  c arbonic 
 anhydrase inhibitors,  a drenal insufficiency,  r enal tubular acidosis, and  p an-
creatic fistula. 
    Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Address the underlying cause to restore tissue perfusion and oxygenation.  
   2.   Administer fluids, oxygen, and ventilation as needed.     3.    For specific etiologies, consult the appropriate chapters in this hand-
book for further guidance. 
 Indications for bicarbonate therapy are listed in  Table 4-7 . Give 
0.5 mEq/kilogram bicarbonate   for each mEq/L desired rise in [HCO 
3− ]. 
The goal is to restore adequate buffer capacity ([HCO 3− ] > 8 mEq/dL) or 
achieve clinical improvement in shock or dysrhythmias. Seventy-five mEq ofsodium bicarbonate   in 500 mL D5W produces a nearly isotonic solution 
for infusion. 
TABLE 4-7 Indications for Bicarbonate Therapy in Metabolic Acidosis
Indication Rationale
Severe hypobicarbonatemia (< 4 mEq/L) Insufficient buffer concentrations may lead 
to extreme increases in acidemia with small increases in acidosis
Severe acidemia (pH < 7.20) with signs of shock or myocardial irritability that is not rapidly responsive to support measuresTherapy for the underlying cause of acidosis 
depends on adequate organ perfusion
Severe hyperchloremic acidemia
∗Lost bicarbonate must be regenerated by 
 kidneys and liver, which may require days
∗No speciﬁ  c deﬁ  nition by pH exists. The presence of serious hemodynamic insufﬁ  ciency despite supportive care 
should guide the use of bicarbonate therapy for this indication.TABLE 4-6 Causes of Normal Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis
With a Tendency to Hyperkalemia With a Tendency to Hypokalemia
Subsiding DKAEarly uremic acidosisEarly obstructive uropathyRenal tubular acidosis—type IVHypoaldosteronism (Addison disease)Infusion or ingestion of HCI, NH 
4 CI, 
lysine-HCI, or arginine-HCIPotassium-sparing diurecticsRenal tubular acidosis—type I (classical distal 
acidosis)Renal tubular acidosis—type II (proximal  acidosis)AcetazolamideAcute diarrhea with losses of HCO 
3−  and K +
Ureterosigmoidostomy with increased resorption
of H +  and Cl −  and losses of HCO 3−  and K +
Obstruction of artificial ileal bladder
Dilution acidosis
 Key:  DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis.
CHAPTER 4: Fluids, Electrolytes, and Acid-Base Disorders  45
     Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Metabolic alkalosis is classified as [Cl − ] sensitive or [Cl − ] insensitive. The 
two most common causes of metabolic alkalosis are excessive diuresis (with loss of potassium, hydrogen ion, and chloride) and excessive loss of 
gastric secretions (with loss of hydrogen ion and chloride). 
  Clinical Features 
 Symptoms of the underlying disorder (usually fluid loss) dominate the 
clinical presentation, but general symptoms of metabolic alkalosis include muscular irritability, tachydysrhythmia, and impaired oxygen delivery. In most cases, there is also an associated hypokalemia and hypochloremia. 
 Patients with [Cl 
− ] sensitive causes present with hypovolemia second-
ary to vomiting, diarrhea, or diuretic therapy. Patient with [Cl − ] insensi-
tive causes present with normo- to hyper-volemia associated with excess mineralocorticoid activity (renin-secreting tumors, adrenal hyperplasia, hyperaldosteronism, Cushing syndrome).  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.   Administer NS to treat dehydration.  
   2.   Monitor electrolytes.     
  Respiratory Acidosis 
  Clinical Features 
 Respiratory acidosis secondary to hypoventilation may be life threatening. 
The clinical picture usually is dominated by the underlying disorder. Typi-cally, respiratory acidosis depresses the mental function, which may pro-gressively slow the respiratory rate. Patients may be confused, somnolent, and, eventually, unconscious. Pulse oximetry may be misleading, making arterial blood gases essential for the diagnosis. 
 The differential diagnosis includes drug overdose, CNS disease, chest 
wall disease, pleural or lung disease, and trauma.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    The treatment is to improve ventilation. Depressed mental status is an 
indication for intubation. An exception to this is opiate intoxication where rapid administration of naloxone may improve ventilation.  
   2.   Treat the underlying disorder.     
  Respiratory Alkalosis 
  Clinical Features 
 Hyperventilation syndrome is a problematic diagnosis for the emergency 
physician because many life-threatening disorders present with tachypnea and anxiety: asthma, pulmonary embolism, diabetic ketoacidosis, and  others. Symptoms of respiratory alkalosis often are dominated by the  primary disorder promoting the hyperventilation. Symptoms of hyperventi-
lation include dizziness, carpal-pedal spasm, and, frequently, a chest pain 
described as tightness. 
46 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
 The diagnosis of hyperventilation due to anxiety is a diagnosis of exclu-
sion. Arterial blood gases can be used to rule out acidosis and hypoxia. Causes of respiratory alkalosis include CNS tumor or stroke, infection or fever, hypoxia, lung disease, hyperthyroidism, toxins (eg, sympathomimetics 
or aspirin), liver disease, pregnancy, and anemia.  
  Emergency Department Care and Disposition  
   1.    Treat the underlying cause.  
   2.    Rule out life threatening causes of hyperventilation before diagnosing 
anxiety. Anxiolytics may be helpful, such as  lorazepam   1 to 2 milligrams 
IV or PO. 
   3.   Rebreathing into a paper bag can cause hypoxia; it is not recommended.          
 For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th ed., 
see Chapter 19, “Acid-Base Disorders,” by David D. Nicolaou and Gabor D. Kelen; Chapter 20, “Blood Gases,” by Todd L. Slesinger; and Chapter 21, “Fluids and Electrolytes,” by Gabor D. Kelen and Edbert Hsu.   
47Therapeutic Approach to the 
Hypotensive Patient 
   John E.  Gough  
 ■  THERAPEUTIC APPROACH TO THE HYPOTENSIVE PATIENT 
 Shock is circulatory insufficiency that creates an imbalance between tissue 
oxygen supply (delivery) and oxygen demand (consumption). Such tissue hypoperfusion is associated with decreased venous oxygen content and metabolic acidosis (lactic acidosis). Shock is classified into four categories based on etiology: (a) hypovolemic, (b) cardiogenic, (c) distributive (eg, neurogenic and anaphylactic), and (d) obstructive.  
 ■  CLINICAL FEATURES 
 Factors that influence the clinical presentation of a patient in shock include 
the etiology, duration, and severity of the shock state and the underlying medical status of the patient. Often the precipitating cause of shock may be readily apparent (eg, acute myocardial infarction, trauma, gastrointesti-nal [GI] bleeding, or anaphylaxis). It is not uncommon for the patient to present with nonspecific symptoms (eg, generalized weakness, lethargy, or 
altered mental status). A targeted history of the presenting symptoms and 
previously existing conditions (eg, cardiovascular disease, GI bleeding, adrenal insufficiency, or diabetes) will aid in identifying the cause and guide the initial treatment of shock. Drug use (prescribed and nonpre-scribed) is an essential element of the initial history. Medication use may be the cause or a contributing factor to the evolution of shock. For  example, diuretics can lead to volume depletion and cardiovascular medi-
cations (eg, β-blockers) can depress the pumping action of the heart. The 
possibility of drug toxicity and anaphylactic reactions to medications also should be considered. 
 Assessment of vital signs is a routine part of the physical examination; 
however, no single vital sign or value is diagnostic in the evaluation of the 
presence or absence of shock. The patient’s temperature may be elevated or subnormal. The presence of hyperthermia or hypothermia may be a result of endogenous factors (eg, infections or hypometabolic states) or exogenous causes (eg, environmental exposures). The heart rate is typically  elevated; however, bradycardia may be present with many conditions, such as excellent baseline physiologic status (young athletes), intraabdominal hemorrhage (sec-ondary to vagal stimulation), cardiovascular medication use (eg, β-blockers 
and digoxin), hypoglycemia, and preexisting cardiovascular disease. 
 The respiratory rate is frequently elevated early in shock. Increased 
minute ventilation, increased dead space, bronchospasm, and hypocapnia may be seen. As shock progresses, hypoventilation, respiratory failure, and respiratory distress syndrome may occur. 
 Shock is usually, but not always, associated with systemic arterial hypoten-
sion, with a systolic blood pressure (BP) belo w 90 mm Hg. The insensiti vity 
5CHAPTER  
48 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
of blood pressure to detect global tissue hypoperfusion has been repeat-
edly confirmed. Thus, shock may occur with a normal blood pressure, and hypotension may occur without shock. Early in shock, the systolic and diastolic BPs may initially be normal or elevated in response to a compen-
satory mechanism such as tachycardia and vasoconstriction. As the body’s 
compensatory mechanisms fail, BP typically falls. Postural changes in BP, commonly seen with hypovolemic states, will precede overt hypotension. The pulse pressure, the difference between systolic and diastolic BP mea-surements, may be a more sensitive indicator. The pulse pressure usually rises early in shock and then decreases before a change in the systolic BP is seen. 
 In addition to these vital sign abnormalities, other cardiovascular mani-
festations may include neck vein distention or flattening and cardiac dys-
rhythmias. A third heart sound (S3) may be auscultated in high-output 
states. Decreased coronary perfusion pressures can lead to myocardial isch-emia, decreased ventricular compliance, increased left ventricular diastolic pressures, and pulmonary edema. 
 Decreased cerebral perfusion leads to mental status changes such as 
weakness, restlessness, confusion, disorientation, delirium, syncope, and coma. Patients with longstanding hypertension may exhibit these changes without severe hypotension. Cutaneous manifestations may include pallor, pale or dusky skin, sweating, bruising, petechiae, cyanosis (may not be evident if the hemoglobin level is less than 5 grams/dL), altered tempera-ture, and delayed capillary refill. 
 GI manifestations resulting from low flow states may include ileus, GI 
bleeding, pancreatitis, acalculous cholecystitis, and mesenteric ischemia. To conserve water and sodium, levels of aldosterone and antidiuretic hor-mone are increased. This results in a reduced glomerular filtration rate, redistribution of blood flow from the renal cortex to the renal medulla, and oliguria. In sepsis, a paradoxical polyuria may occur and be mistaken for adequate hydration. 
 Early in shock a common metabolic abnormality is a respiratory alkalosis. 
As the shock state continues and compensatory mechanisms begin to fail, anaerobic metabolism occurs, leading to the formation of lactic acid and resulting in a metabolic acidosis. Other metabolic abnormalities that may 
be seen are hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and hyperkalemia.  
 ■  DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL 
 The clinical presentation and presumed etiology of shock will dictate the 
diagnostic studies, monitoring modalities, and interventions used. The approach to each patient must be individualized; however, frequently  performed laboratory studies include complete blood count; platelet count; electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine determinations; prothrom-
bin and partial thromboplastin times; and urinalysis. Other tests commonly 
used are arterial blood gas, lactic acid, fibrinogen, fibrin split products, D-dimer, and cortisol determinations; hepatic function panel; cerebrospinal fluid studies; and cultures of potential sources of infection. A pregnancy test should be performed on all females of childbearing potential. No single 
CHAPTER 5: Therapeutic Approach to the Hypotensive Patient 49
laboratory value is sensitive or specific for shock. Other common diagnos-
tic tests include radiographs (chest and abdominal), electrocardiographs, 
computed tomography scans (chest, head, abdomen, and pelvis), and 
 echocardiograms. Beside US may also help determine the etiology of shock. The following are helpful in this assessment: subcostal cardiac view, inferior vena cava view, parasternal long-axis cardiac view, apical four-chamber cardiac view, right upper quadrant abdominal view, pelvic view, and abdominal aorta view. 
 Continuous monitoring of vital signs should be instituted in all patients. 
Additionally, modalities such as pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO 
2 , central venous 
pressure, central venous O 2  saturation, cardiac output, and calculation of sys-
temic vascular resistance and systemic oxygen delivery may be indicated. 
 A search to determine the etiology of the shock must be undertaken. 
Lack of response to appropriate stabilization measures should cause the clinician to evaluate the patient for a more occult cause. First, the physician must be certain that the basic steps of resuscitation have been carried out 
appropriately. Consider whether or not the patient has been adequately 
volume resuscitated. Early use of vasopressors may elevate the central venous pressure and mask the presence of continued hypovolemia. Ensure that all equipment is connected and functioning appropriately. Carefully expose and examine the patient for occult wounds. Consider less commonly seen diagnoses, such as cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax, adrenal insufficiency, toxic or allergic reactions, and occult bleeding (eg, rupture ectopic pregnancy, or occult intraabdominal or pelvic bleeding) in the patient who is not responding as expected. 
 Please refer to the other chapters in this book regarding the evaluation 
of the specific forms of shock.  
 ■  EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT CARE AND DISPOSITION 
 The goal of the interventions is to restore adequate tissue perfusion in con-
cert with the identification and treatment of the underlying etiology. 
    1.    Aggressive airway control, best obtained through endotracheal intuba-
tion, is indicated. Remember that associated interventions such as medications (ie, sedatives can exacerbate hypotension) and positive pressure ventilation may reduce preload and cardiac output and may contribute to hemodynamic collapse. 
   2.    All patients should receive supplemental high-flow oxygen. If mechani-
cal ventilation is used, neuromuscular blocking agents should be used to 
decrease lactic acidosis from muscle fatigue and increased oxygen con-sumption. Arterial oxygen saturation should be restored to > 93% and ventilation controlled to maintain a PaCO 
2  of 35 to 40 mm Hg.  
   3.   Circulatory hemodynamic stabilization begins with IV access through 
large-bore peripheral venous lines. Central venous access aids in assessing volume status (preload) and monitoring ScvO 
2 . US guidance 
has proven helpful with these procedures. Central venous access is the preferred route for the long-term administration of vasopressor therapy. The Trendelenburg position does not improve cardiopulmonary perfor-mance compared with the supine position, and it may worsen pulmonary 
50 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
gas exchange and predispose to aspiration. Passive leg raising above the 
level of the heart with the patient supine can be effective. Early surgical consultation is indicated for internal bleeding. Most external hemor rhage
can be controlled by direct compression. Rarely will clamping or tying 
off of vessels be needed.  
   4.    The type, amount, and rate of fluid replacement remain areas of con-
troversy. There is no difference in survival comparing crystalloid with colloid resuscitation. Crystalloid solutions continue to be recom-mended because of the increased cost of colloid agents. Most use isotonic crystalloid intravenous fluids (0.9% NaCl, Ringer lactate) in the initial resuscitation phase. Due to the increased cost, lack of proven benefit, and potential for disease transmission (with FFP), the routine use of colloids (5% albumin, purified protein fraction, fresh-
frozen plasma [FFP], and synthetic colloid solutions [hydroxyethyl 
starch or dextran 70]) is questionable. Standard therapy in the hemo-dynamically unstable patient is 20 to 40 mL/kilogram given rapidly (over 10 to 20 min). Because only about 30% of infused isotonic crys-talloids remain in the intravascular space, it is recommended to infuse approximately 3 times the estimated blood loss in acute hemorrhagic shock. However, the benefits of early and aggressive fluid replacement in these trauma patients remain unproven as do the benefits of permis-sive hypotension.  
   5.    Blood remains the ideal resuscitative fluid. When possible, use fully 
cross-matched PRBCs. If the clinical situation dictates more rapid inter-
vention, type-specific, type O (rhesus negative to be given to females of 
childbearing years) may be used. The decision to use platelets or FFP should be based on clinical evidence of impaired hemostasis and fre-quent monitoring of coagulation parameters. Platelets are generally given if there is ongoing hemorrhage and the platelet count is 50 000/mm 
3
or lower; administer 6 units initially. FFP is indicated if the prothrombin time is prolonged beyond 1.5 seconds; administer 2 units initially. Trauma patients requiring transfusion of multiple units of packed RBCs should receive FFP and platelets early in ratios that approach 1:1:1 in order to address the accompanying coagulopathy that will likely be 
present. The use of fresh whole blood has also been advocated and may 
be the most effective approach for such patients. The potential need for FFP and platelet transfusions should be considered early and reassessed frequently in an effort to detect and limit the adverse effects of trauma-induced coagulopathy.  
   6.    Vasopressors are used after appropriate volume resuscitation has occurred 
and there is persistent hypotension. Possible choices include: dobutamine 2.0 
to 20.0 micrograms/kilogram/min  ,  dopamine 5.0 to 20.0 micrograms/
kilogram/min ,  and  norepinephrine 0.5 to 30.0 microgram/min . 
   7.    The goal of resuscitation is to maximize survival and minimize morbidity 
using objective hemodynamic and physiologic values to guide therapy. A goal-directed approach of urine output > 0.5 mL/kilogram/h, CVP 8 to12 mm Hg, MAP 65 to 90 mm Hg, and ScvO 
2  > 70% during ED 
resuscitation of septic shock significantly decreases mortality.  
   8.    Acidosis should be treated with adequate ventilation and fluid resuscita-
tion. Sodium bicarbonate (1 mEq/kilogram) use is controversial. Use 
CHAPTER 5: Therapeutic Approach to the Hypotensive Patient 51 
only in the setting of severe acidosis refractory to above-mentioned 
methods. Correct only to arterial pH 7.25.  
   9.    Early surgical or medical consultation for admission or transfer is 
 indicated.        
 For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide  , 7th ed., 
see Chapter 25, “Approach to the Patient in Shock,” by Ronny M. Otero, H. Bryant Nguyen, Emanuel P. Rivers; and Chapter 26, “Fluid and Blood Resuscitation,” by José G. Cabañas, James E. Manning and Charles B. Carins.   
52Anaphylaxis, Acute Allergic 
Reactions, and Angioedema 
   Alix L.  Mitchell  
 Allergic reactions range from localized urticaria to life-threatening anaphy-
laxis. Anaphylaxis refers to the most severe form of immediate hypersensitiv-ity reaction and encompasses both IgE-mediated reactions and anaphylactoid reactions, which do not require a previous sensitizing exposure. 
 ■  CLINICAL FEATURES 
 Anaphylaxis may occur within seconds or be delayed over an hour after an 
exposure; more rapid reactions are associated with higher mortality. Com-mon exposures are foods, medications, insect stings, and allergen immuno-therapy injections. Many cases are idiopathic. Criteria for anaphylaxis describe an acute progression of organ system involvement that may lead to cardiovascular collapse. Organ system involvement can include derma-
tologic (pruritus, flushing, urticaria, erythema multiforme, angioedema), 
respiratory tract (dyspnea, wheezing, cough, stridor, rhinorrhea), cardiovas-cular (dysrhythmias, collapse, arrest), gastrointestinal (cramping, vomiting, diarrhea), genitourinary (urgency, cramping), and eye (pruritus, tearing, redness). A biphasic mediator release can occur in up to 20% of cases caus-ing recurrence of symptoms 4 to 8 hours after the initial exposure. Patients on β-blockers are susceptible to an exaggerated allergic response and may 
be refractory to first line treatment.  
 ■  DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL 
 Anaphylaxis is a clinical diagnosis. History may confirm exposure to a pos-
sible allergen, such as a new drug, food, or sting. There is no specific test to verify the diagnosis in real time; anaphylaxis should be considered in any rapidly progressing multi-system illness. Workup should be directed at rul-ing out other diagnoses while stabilizing the patient. The differential depends on the organ systems involved and may include myocardial isch-
emia, gastroenteritis, asthma, carcinoid, epiglottitis, hereditary angio-
edema, and vasovagal reactions.  
 ■  EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT CARE AND DISPOSITION 
 Resuscitation must begin with airway, breathing, and circulation. Patients 
with confirmed or suspected anaphylaxis should be placed on a cardiac monitor with pulse oximetry, and intravenous access should be obtained. 
     1.    Administer oxygen as indicated by oximetry. Angioedema or respira-
tory distress should prompt early consideration for intubation. Prepa-rations should be made for “rescue” transtracheal jet insufflation or cricothyroidotomy.  
   2.    Limit further exposure. This may be as simple as stopping an intrave-
nous drug or removing a stinger. First aid measures, ice, and elevation 
may be helpful for local symptoms.  
6 CHAPTER
CHAPTER 6: Anaphylaxis, Acute Allergic Reactions, and Angioedema 53 
   3.    First line therapy for anaphylaxis is  epinephrine  . In patients without car-
diovascular collapse, administer 0.3 to 0.5 milligram (0.3 to 0.5 mL of 
1:1000; pediatric dose, 0.01 milligram/kilogram to a maximum of 
0.5 milligram) intramuscularly in the thigh. The dose may be repeated every 5 min as needed. Patients who are refractory to IM dosing or in significant shock should receive intravenous epinephrine. A bolus of 100 micrograms of 1:100 000 dilution (place 0.1 mL of 1:1000 in 
10 mL normal saline) can be given over 5 to 10 min followed by an infusion of 1 to 4 micrograms/min, with close observation for chest 
pain or arrhythmias.  
   4.    Hypotensive patients require aggressive fluid resuscitation with 
 normal saline   1 to 2 L (pediatric dose, 10 to 20 mL/kilogram).  
   5.    Steroids should be used in all cases of anaphylaxis to control persistent 
or delayed reactions. Severe cases can be treated with  methylpredniso-
lone  125 milligrams IV (pediatric dose, 2 milligrams/kilogram). Mild 
allergic reactions can be treated with oral  prednisone   60 milligrams 
(pediatric dose, 2 milligrams/kilogram).  
   6.    Every patient with severe allergic symptoms requires antihistamines. 
 Diphenhydramine   can be given 50 milligrams IV (pediatric dose, 
1 milligram/kilogram). In addition, an H 
2  blocker such as  ranitidine   
50 milligrams IV (pediatric dose, 0.5 milligram/kilogram) may be helpful.  
   7.    Bronchospasm can be treated with nebulized β-agonists such as  albuterol   
2.5 milligrams. If refractory, consider an inhaled anticholinergic,  ipratro-
pium bromide   250 micrograms, and intravenous  magnesium   2 grams 
(25 to 50 milligrams/kilogram in children) over 20 to 30 min.  
   8.    For patients on β-blockers with hypotension refractory to epinephrine 
and fluids, use  glucagon   1 milligram IV every 5 min. An infusion 
of 5 to 15 micrograms/min should be started once blood pressure 
improves.  
   9.    Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are a common trigger for 
nonallergic angioedema. Airway compromise can develop rapidly. Treatment is supportive. Epinephrine, steroids, and antihistamines are often given although benefit has not been proven.  
   10.    Patients with hereditary angioedema do not respond to treatment for 
anaphylaxis and should be treated with C1 esterase inhibitor 
replacement. Treatment with fresh frozen plasma has been reported as an alternative when C1 esterase inhibitor replacement is not available.  
   11.    Unstable or refractory patients merit admission to the intensive care 
unit. Patients with moderate to severe symptoms should be admitted for observation. Patient with mild allergic reactions should be observed in the ED and may be sent home if symptoms are stable or improving. Stable patients who received epinephrine are generally felt to be safe for discharge after 4 hours without symptoms. Consider observing 
patients with a history of severe reactions and patients on β-blockers 
for a longer period.  
   12.    Discharge patients on an antihistamine and a short course of predni-
sone. Counsel all patients about the need to return to the ED in the event of late recurrence of symptoms and about avoiding future expo-sures to the allergen, if known. All patients who have experienced 
54 SECTION 1: Resuscitative Problems and Techniques
severe allergic reactions should have and know how to use an epineph-
rine autoinjector. Consider Medic-Alert bracelets and referral to an 
allergist in these patients.        
 For further reading in  Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,   7th ed., 
see Chapter 27, “Anaphylaxis, Acute Allergic Reactions, and Angioedema,” by Brian H. Rowe and Theodore J. Gaeta.   
55  Acute Pain Management and 
Procedural Sedation 
   Boris  Garber  
 Acute pain is present in 50% to 60% of all emergency department (ED) 
patients. Procedural sedation and analgesia often is needed for painful interventions or diagnostic studies. 
 ■  CLINICAL FEATURES 
 Responses to pain vary and may include increased heart rate, blood pres-
sure, respiratory rate, and behavioral changes. Because subjective impres-sions may be inaccurate, pain is often assessed with objective scales. Pain relief is a dynamic process and reassessment is mandatory.  
 ■  EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT CARE AND DISPOSITION 
 Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions may be helpful for treat-
ing anxiety and pain in the ED. Nonpharmacologic interventions include the application of heat or cold, immobilization and elevation of injured extremi-ties, explanation and reassurance, music, biofeedback, guided imagery, and distraction methods, such as feeding sucrose solution to infants. Discussing a painful intervention with a patient immediately before the procedure may 
decrease the anxiety created by anticipation. When pharmacologic interven-
tion is needed, the selection of agent should be guided by the need for seda-tion or analgesia, the route of delivery, and the desired duration of effects. 
  Acute Pain Control 
 Nonopiate Analgesics, such as  acetaminophen  , 650 to 1000 milligrams 
(15 milligrams/kilogram PO or PR in children) or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen,  400 to 800 milligrams PO (10 
milligrams/kilogram PO in children) can be used to treat mild to moderate pain. Parenteral NSAIDs are no more effective than oral medications. 
Adverse effects of NSAIDS include gastrointestinal irritation, renal dys-
function, platelet dysfunction, and impaired coagulation. Aspirin should be avoided in children because of an association with Reye  syndrome. 
 Opiates, such as  morphine,  0.1 milligram/kilogram IV (0.1 to 
0.3 milligram/kilogram in children), fentanyl,   1.5 micrograms/kilogram IV 
7 CHAPTERAnalgesia, Anesthesia, 
and Sedation
 2SECTION
